When I look out my window at the trees, at the buildings, at the people do I really perceive a world separate to me?  Or rather am I just somehow aware of creations of my own mind?  Or am I aware of the creation of someone else's mind, a la The Matrix?  The answers one gives to these sorts of philosophical questions (or perhaps more accurately, the reasons one gives in support of them) are generally interpreted as having a bearing on an age-old subject in philosophy: the realism debate.  It is very hard to give a general account of the realism debate.  As a first approximation, it is useful to frame it the debate between those who hold that some subject matter (for example, the external world as in the preceding questions) "exists" in some sense.  However, in recent times the accuracy of this depiction has been called into question.\footnote{See \citet{Dummett:????} and \citet{Wright:1992} for example.}

An aspect of the realism debate with a particularly lengthy history is concerned with mathematics as a subject matter.  In this debate there are two broad sides: mathematical realist (who hold that mathematics involves something independent of us) and nominalists (who hold that mathematics is in no sense independent of us).  *green need to work on this a bit*   Within the mathematical realist camp there is one position in particular that will be of central importantance in what follows: Platonism.  The mathematical Platonist holds that mathematical entities (e.g. numbers, groups, fields, etc.) are real (what this means exactly will be drawn out in Chapter 1). In recent years, a major argument for Platonism has been put forward and has garnered a lot of attention: the Quine-Putnam indispensability argument.  Its proponents use it to argue for the existence of mathematical entities on the basis of their involvement in our best scientific theories.  While there are various versions of the argument in the literature, I will primarily be concerned here with the sustained treatment offered by Mark Colyvan in his book, The Indispensability of Mathematics~\citep{Colyvan:2001}.  

Early in his book, Colyvan specifies that his primary target in the argumentation to follow is meant to be scientific realists (who hold that the theoretical entities of science "exist" in some sense independently of us), in particular he wishes to target those who base their realist commitments in some sort of inference to the best explanation style argument.  His point in doing this is that, given the already close relation between inferences to the best explanation and indispensability arguments (which will be explored in Chapter 1), scientific realists should be much more amenable to the style of reasoning engaged in in the indispensability argument.  Accordingly, at various points in what follows it will be useful to link the discussion back to this proposed target audience and to Colyvan's purported supporter base (Platonists).

Unfortunately, there are many worthy criticisms of the indispensability argument that I just do not have the space to deal with here.\footnote{As a starting point for critical discussion of many of these criticisms I highly recommend Colyvan's book.  He is a most generous, eloquent and even-handed opponent.}  Of these, the most significiant include denials that mathematical entities are indeed indispensable to our best scientific theories\footnote{In particular see \citet{Field:????}.}, criticisms of confirmational holism\footnote{See \citet{Sober:????}.} and further criticisms of Quinean naturalism.\footnote{See \citet{Maddy:????} for example.}

I will begin my discussion in Chapter 1 with a detailed account of just how Colyvan's indispensability argument is supposed to work, focussing not only on the definition of the terms involved but also on the (largely Quinean) theoretical underpinnings of the premises.  In Chapter 2, employing a theoretical framework due to Szabo, I will focus on criticism very much in the "Quinean spirit" in which the indispensability argument is put forward.  Accordingly, I will largely hold the premises of the argument to be true, focussing instead on how well the mathematical entities involved in it match up with the expectation (both of the Platonist and of the IBE-based scientific realist) of what a mathematical entity is supposed to be.  In Chapter 3 however, I will engage in some serious criticism of the fundamental theoretical underpinings of the argument.  In particular, calling on arguments due to Carnap, Price, Yablo, and ...,  I will call into question the conception of ontological commitment at the heart of Quinean naturalism.  Finally, I will argue that while Colyvan probably fails to do enough to keep his supporters (Platonists) happy or to convince any significant proportion of his target audience (IBE-based scientific realists) to make the move to Platonism, there is still much of value to be found in the considerations involved in the assessment of the indispensability argument for Platonism in mathematics.  Indeed, I claim that perhaps what the preceding analysis points to is the need to provide a new metaphilosophical framework in which to situate metaphysical investigations, one that allows the descriptive insights of both sides of the debate to be fully exploited.