----
_Introduction_

The Quine-Putnam indispensability argument for Platonism in the philosophy of mathematics (hereafter referred to as "the indispensability argument") is an empiricist argument.  It attempts to show that Platonism follows from our best scientific practice (or at least the body of knowledge resultant from that practice).  In order to demonstrate this, the argument relies to a large extent on two theses central to Quine's philosophical program (his program, not necessarily his own, sometimes contradictory, thought): confirmational holism (the thesis that scientific theories face the "tribunal of experience" as a whole rather than individually) and (Quinean) naturalism (briefly put, the thesis that philosophy is in no sense "prior" to science).  In this chapter I will engage in a detailed discussion of the indispensability argument and its supporting theses.  It will be useful to begin with a brief characterisation of the argument itself.

_Indispensability in a Nutshell_

Following Colyvan, I summarise the indispensability argument as follows:
P1. We ought to have ontological commitment to all and only those entities that are indispensable to our best scientific theories.
P2. Mathematical entities are indispensable to our best scientific theories.
----
C. We ought to have ontological commitment to mathematical entities.

P1 is known as an indispensability claim.  Indispensability claims are often seen as very plausible premises for arguments of this type, known as ``inferences to the best explanation'' or IBEs.  For example, many scientific realist hold a belief in the existence of electrons on the basis that their existence is the best explanation of various physical observations.

I will talk in Chapter xxx about how indispensability claims are discussed in the literature.

From this brief overview two things become apparent: firstly, the argument form is obviously valid (it is a categorical syllogism), thus any criticisms must take the form of a denial of one of the premises; secondly, several terms in the characterisation stand in need of clarification/precisificiation: "ontological commitment,"  "entities" (and indeed, more crucially for the following chapter, "mathematical entities"), "indispensable" and "best."  One may also note that there are demarcation issues inherent in the use of terms "scientific" and "theories."  However, these latter two terms will be treated as unproblematic as discussion of the related issues is beyond the scope of this work.  It will be useful then, to continue on with a discussion of the problematic terms just identified.

_Ontological Commitment_

What is it to have an ontological commitment?  At its most fundamental it is to assert the truth of some statement of the form "X exists," where X is some entity (for present purposes, a mathematical entity).  What exactly it is to be an entity is something that will be addressed in the next section.  For now it will suffice to think of an entity as something akin to a tree or an electron.  However, the simple assertion given as characteristic of ontological commitment above will not be specific enough for the purposes of this debate (the wealth of literature on the realist/antirealist debate from the ancient Greeks through to the present day can attest to that).  Thus, further investigation is warranted into just what the term "exists" in the assertion is meant to mean.

Wright argues that a claim of ontological commitment can be read in at least four (distinct but interrelated) ways:
1. As a claim of semantic realism: i.e. that statements involving the entity X have a determinate truth-value regardless of whether or not there is ever any possibility of obtaining evidence as to what that truth-value is.
2. As a claim about the "width of cosmological role" of the entity X: i.e. that it plays a role in explaining things far beyond its own are of discourse (e.g. mathematics).
3. As a claim about the judgement-independence of the truth of statements involving X: i.e. that, under ideal conditions, parties familiar with X's area of discourse would not disagree as to the truth-value of statements involving X.
4. As a claim about the role of cognitive command in determining the truth-values of statements involving X: i.e. that a disagreement over the truth-value of one of those statements must be due to a cognitive mistake by at least one of the parties.

However, I agree with Colyvan that these sorts of characterisations do not really capture just what the Platonist's claim is meant to be\footnote{although Wright's discussion will prove useful in later chapters, once the coherence of the Platonist's ontological claim has been called into question}.  Wright's characterisation focuses largely on the linguistic role of the ontological assertion "X exists," through the examination of the notion of truth at work in the area of discourse under consideration and of the explanatory role(s) of the entities involved.  What the Platonist has in mind however is a more meaty, metaphysical kind of ontological claim, a claim that mathematical entities exist in some sense "out there," independently of how we capture them through language (this is not to say that this may not also be manifest in aspects of Wright's characterisation, just that the "out thereness" is more fundamental).  Thus, mathematical entities are meant to exist in much the same way that scientific realists hold unobservable entities such as electrons to exist (although, by way of clarification of just what is wrapped up in the term "exist" here, it should be said that many Platonists would dispute whether mathematical entities play any causal role).  To put it another way, one can approach the Platonist conception of ontological commitment by way of extending the basic view that physical entities (such as chairs, tables, etc.) exist to the more "abstract" class of mathematical entities.  At this point then, it will prove useful to examine more closely just what Colyvan's Platonist means by the terms "entity" and "mathematical entity."

_Entities - Mathematical and Otherwise_

Primarily, it seems that Colyvan uses the term "entity" to refer to things without implying any ontological commitment via past associations (such as might be the case if he used the more ontologically weighty term "object" for example, or moving in the other direction "concept").  On this account then, an entity is just supposed to be a bare, ontologically agnostic bearer for any properties we generally hold the particular entity to have.  For example, the entity "2" would bear properties such as its place on the real number line, it status as the sum of 1 and 1, etc.    Williams (1953) provides a good taxonomy via which one can get a better grip on the important variances in things that may be grouped together under the entity banner.\{I am endebted to Kriegel(2008) for drawing my attention to this useful treatment.}  He distinguishes between four ontological categories: concrete particulars (for example, Socrates), abstract universals (e.g. wisdom), abstract particulars (e.g. Socrates' wisdom), and concrete universals (e.g. Socraeity).

However, it should be noted that the resolution of the ontological status of an entity does not necessarily imply that the ontological status of its properties will be similarly resolved.  For example, it is quite a common for someone to hold the belief that some physical object (a table for example) exists (possibly in virtue of its status as a collection of smaller objects such as atoms) whilst denying that some of its properties (for example, its colour) do.  Thus, as will become important later, a successful argument for the existence of an entity need not necessarily be interpreted as an argument for the existence of all of its properties.  *green Can you think of any examples of the reverse holding Jason (i.e. entity doesn't exist but its properties do)?  I was thinking something along the lines of a van Fraassen position but that doesn't seem accurate.  Probably not all that important anyway - I've got the motivation for the direction that I need with the colour example.*

Now, the key entities that we are concerned with are mathematical ones.  Just what sorts of properties does Colyvan hold mathematical entities to have?  On this point Colyvan (unusually) is less than explicit.  I take it that he regards a mathematical entity to have all its usual "intra-mathematical" properties (e.g. real numbers have their position on the line, sets can have the properties of being measurable or not, functions can have the property of being continuous or not, etc.).  However, there are many extra-mathematical properties about which he believes it is permissible to be agnostic.  These are: causal properties (i.e. causal inertness or otherwise), spatio-temporal locative properties (or the lack thereof), and metaphysical necessity/contingency.  He argues for this limited conception of mathematical entities on the basis of the disagreement within the Platonist community over whether or not mathematical objects have all or some subset of these properties.  Unfortunately, I believe that in failing to include these properties, Colyvan creates what is at best an ambiguity (at worst a fatal flaw) in the conclusion of his argument.  This is because there \emph{is} an additional property that mathematical entities are generally held to have in some sense or other --- abstractness.   At the very least Colyvan fails to provide any basis on which mathematical entities should not be considered to be concrete particulars according to Williams' taxonomy above --- a classification that would be highly controversial by Platonists.  The nature and consequences of this oversight will be treated in far greater detail in Chapter 2.

_Indispensability and our ``Best'' Scientific Theories_

When considering what it is for a mathematical entity to be indispensable to a scientific theory the first important thing to note is that indispensability in this sense is not meant to be synonymous with ineliminability.  This is because of Craig's Theorem in mathematical logic, which states that any recursively enumerable theory is recursively axiomatisable.  The details of this procedure are not important for present purposes is that using this theorem, one can reaxiomatise the theoretical parts of a scientific so as to leave only the axioms, logical laws, and observation statements - effectively eliminating all theoretical terms.  Accordingly,  Many criticisms of the application of this result to scientific theories have been made such as: that the resultant reaxiomatised theories violate the principle of parsimony in scientific theory choice; that the reaxiomatised theory should not be considered as a truly independent theory, as it is parasitic upon its predecessor; and that the approach relies upon a mistaken, syntactic view of theories.  However, given that Colyvan himself raises the possibility of eliminating theoretical terms in this way, it will be useful to examine a way in which indispensability can be interpreted in a stronger sense. 

In a move likely motivated by the parsimony-based criticisms (and by Field's attempt to argue that mathematics is indeed dispensable), Colyvan proposes the following strengthened interpretation of indispensability: a theoretical entity is indispensable to a scientific theory if its elimination causes that theory to become less preferable (or, for an even stronger requirement, if its elimination does not cause an increase in the preferability of the theory).  Of course, the strength of this new interpretation is largely dependent on what is to determine theory preference.  According to Colyvan, preference should be based on the standard desiderata for good scientific theories.  These include: empirical success, unificatory/explanatory power, parsimony, explanatory power, fertility, and formal elegance (a desideratum meant to capture some sense of a theory's aesthetic value).  However, given that Colyvan does not give a detailed account of exactly how this is meant to work (a key question is how to provide uncontroversial weightings for the various desiderata) and that the fine detail of his views on this matter is not of relevance to my concerns in later chapters, I will move on to other matters.  Suffice to say that a lot more remains to be said regarding the details of this interpretation and it is by no means clear that the Platonist will be able to do this in a way that is consistent and doesn't raise further problems.

Colyvan's proposal of a preferability-based interpretation of indispensability leads nicely into the next topic for discussion: which theories are meant to constitute our best scientific theories.  Quine puts forwards several criteria upon which scientific theories may be judged: mathematical conservatism, modesty (logical weakness), simplicity, generality, and refutability. *green (need to go through Quine readings to tighten this up)*  Astute readers will note a distinct similarity between the criteria Quine proposes here and those proposed by Colyvan in relation to indispensability in the preceding paragraph.  This is because what Colyvan has effectively done is built the idea of what it is to be the best scientific theory into his interpretation of indispensability.  Thus these terms are now fundamentally intertwined for the purposes of the indispensability argument. (Unless of course, one wishes to argue against the application of Craig's Theorem and then reduce indispensability to ineliminability, but this does not appear to be a route that Colyvan wishes to traverse.)

_Quinean Naturalism_

It will be useful to consider the two supporting theses (naturalism and confirmational holism) in terms of their contribution to what I like ot call the "Quinean ontological machine" (hereafter referred to as the QOM), a theoretical machine taking scientific theories (in this case our best ones) as its input and producing real (in the sense of a metaphysical ontological commitment) entities as its output.  

Naturalism in general is an attempt to structure a philosophical methodology that is respectful of the great successes of the natural sciences.  However, many contemporary approaches to philosophy would wish to lay claim to the label naturalism.  Accordingly, more work needs to be done in order to track down the particular Quinean variant we are concerned with here.  As mentioned briefly above, Quinean naturalism is the doctrine that there is no "first" philosophy, i.e. that philosophy is not in any sense prior to science.  But what exactly does that mean?  The details of Quinean naturalism can be cached out in terms of three main components: what Colyvan refers to as the normative and the descriptive strands, and the Quinean ontic thesis.  I will now discuss each of these in turn.  

As intimated above, the first strand of Quine's naturalism takes on a normative form.  This normative form concerns how one ought to investigate the nature of the world (i.e. with what one's method of ontological investigation should be).  For Quine, science is the primary way in which one investigates what is in the world.  If one has questions about the world, one should look to science for answers.  In terms of the QOM, this strand tells the machine where to look for its input - namely, to our best scientific theories.

The second, descriptive strand of Quine's naturalism involves the claim that philosophy is continuous with science.  As Colyvan points out, what this entails is a little unclear --- the claim of continuity obviously doesn't rule out that philosophy and science differ in some way.  However, the exact nature of this difference is ambiguous in Quine.  Given that this strand does not play a significant role in the QOM, I will set aside this ambiguity for now (it will reemerge below in the more discussion of the various ways in which one can satisfy naturalist inclinations).

In his influential paper \emph{On What There Is} Quine puts forward what is here referred to as his ``ontic thesis.''   This thesis is meant specify exactly what the ontological commitments of a given theory are.  Quine does this by examining the variables necessary for a logical respresentation of the theory.  Once a theory is represented in logical form it is held to be committed to the existence of whatever the variables used in it range over.  To put it in the form of a well-worn slogan: to be is to be the value of a bound variable.  This the ontic thesis further narrows down where the QOM should look for its input --- it should look to the bound variables of our best scientific theories.  At this stage I should note that this Quinean claim will subjected to criticism in what follows.  To be specific I will claim that the arguments of Yablo and (*green someone Meinongesque here?*) raise severe doubts over the viability of this interpretation of ontological commitment.

As Colyvan notes, at this stage it may look like the Platonist has all they need in order to argue for the existence of mathematical entities.  However, the present theoretical apparatus is not quite sufficient for the Platonist's needs.  In the discussion above we have seen that there are ways in which entities may be removed from theories, i.e. there are ways in which bound variables may be eliminated or replaced.  Accordingly, a little more workm needs to be done before the QOM can be put to work on our best scientific theories.  For Quine, that work is done by confirmational holism.

In light of the discussion that is to follow (in Chapter 3 in particular) it will be useful here to briefly examine some of the other ways in which one may incorporate the naturalist urge into a philosophical methodology before moving on. As Papineau points out~\footnote{\citet{Papineau:2008}} naturalist urges can broadly be separated into methodological and ontological ones (which is not to say that many naturalists are not subject to both).  Those who indulge the naturalist methodological urge claim that there is (or at least should be) no distinction between the methods of science and those of philosophy.~\footnote{citet{Williamson:2007} is a good example of a recent methodological naturalist position.}  Those subject to the ontological urge on the other hand claim that there is nothing supernatural ``out there'' in the world, that what exists does not exceed the domain of science.~\footnote{Obviously the Quinean position is good example of this.}  In what follows I will focus primarily on the naturalist ontological urge.  In doing so there is one major distinction that I wish to consider: that between representationalist and antirepresentationalist views.  Representationalist is itself a term in wide use in philosophical discourse and as such requires further definition here.  The type of representationalism I have in mind is that most famously attacked by Richard Rorty:\footnote{See Rorty:1979 for example.}  the view that the philosophical mediums with which which we are in direct contact (i.e. thought and language) somehow, if interpreted correctly, represent a metaphysical reality.  Representationalist naturalism could almost be referred to as the received view in philosophy.  Major figures to hold the view include (obviously) Quine and Armstrong (who argues for a naturalist ontology via the eleatic principle: that what exists is what plays a causal role\footnote{See \citet[Ch. 3]{Colyvan:2001} for more discussion of this.}).  In response antirepresentationalists such as Rorty and Price argue that positing an semantic ladder between thought and/or language and metaphysical reality is not a valid move.  Furthermore, they claim, one can satisfy the naturalist urge without recourse to such moves.  In Chapter 3 I will endorse Price's arguments that there is a basic disconnection between the ontological commitments of theory and the strong metaphysical commitment that the Platonist requires.

_Confirmational Holism_

The second major component of the QOM is Quine's doctrine of confirmational holism, sometimes referred to as epistemological holism or the Quine-Duhem thesis.\footnote{Although it is questionable how much of Duhem remains in Quine's formulation --- see \citet{Ariew:2007} for some discussion.}  Quine's doctrine consists of two (fundamentally intertwined) claims: i) that empirical statements are fundamentally interconnected, they cannot be disconfirmed (in any sort of principled way at least) singularly; and ii) that in the face of recalcitrant experience one can always hold any particular statement to be true, provided that one is willing to give up the truth of certain other statements.  For example, suppose that one has a physical theory that predicts the occurrence of some event E given a specific set of circumstances C.  Now suppose that an experiment has been set up to replicate C but that E has not been observed.  Quine's point is that in these circumstances there is any number of ways in which one can interpret the results of the experiment without giving up on the truth of one's theory.  One could cite some problem with the observational apparatus, deny that the circumstances of the experiment were actually those specified by the theory (possibly due to the interference of some unobservable background conditions), etc.  

Whilst the example in the preceding paragraph was primarily meant to illustrate claim ii) of Quine's doctrine (although it can certainly be viewed as illustrative of claim i) as well), it is primarily claim i) that is most useful when discussing confirmational holism's role in the QOM.  Confirmational holism's role is to eliminate the possibility that anything might get "left out" when the ontological commitments of a particular theory are determined.  For example, someone opposed to the indispensability argument may want to claim that, perhaps due to the fact that some theoretical entities differ in regard to certain properties, not \emph{all} the theoretical entities involved in a theory should be held to exist.  Such a view may be employed by the scientific realist unwilling to accept the existence of mathematical entities.  What Quine's confirmational holism does is allow the proponent of the indispensability argument to respond with the claim that the theoretical entities involved in a scientific theory cannot be separated out in this way - ontological commitment is something that must take place at the level of the entities involved in a scientific theory as a whole.  

However, as I shall argue in detail in Chapter 2, it may well be that the QOM achieves holistic ontological result only at the expense of stripping away anything that is distinctively mathematical about the mathematical entities used in scientific theories.

It is important to distinguish Quine's, relatively uncontroversial, confirmational holism from his, far more controversial, doctrine of semantic holism, the belief that the unit of meaning is not the sentence as is commonly thought, but rather a system of sentences, possibly the whole of a language.  Quine used this as the basis for two of his most famous claims: that translation is indeterminate (i.e. that one can never be sure of having grasped the meaning of a word in another language); and that there is no analytic/synthetic distinction (i.e. that there are no sentences that are true in virtue of meaning alone).  Quine also used semantic holism in his formulation of the indispensability argument for Platonism.  However, the indispensability argument as depicted here is only reliant on the less controversial doctrine of confirmational holism and thus should strictly be seen as a descendent of Quine's.

_From Indispensability to IBE_

As discussed, the IBE-based scientific realist is a major target for Colyvan's argument.  This is largely because Colyvan believes there to be a significant connection between indispensability arguments in general and the argument given for realism based on IBE.  He claims that the principle underlying IBE-based realism just \emph{is} indispensability (i.e. that the scientific realist employs a particular kind of indispensability argument).  The existence of scientific entities is argued for on the grounds that they are indispensable for the purpose of explaining how the world works.\footnote{This is by no means an uncontroversial claim (for example see \citet{Lipton:????} for an alternate account of IBE) but for the sake of argument I will assume that it is true here.}  Thus, given that the scientific realist has already endorsed one indispensability argument involving scientific theories, Colyvan claims that it will difficult to avoid accepting his argument too.

However, I believe that the IBE-based scientific realist can indeed plausibly deny Colyvan's indispensibility argument (indeed, a large part of Chapter 2 will provide them with means by which to do so).  To see how lets first explicitly state the purpose for which mathematics is claimed to be indispensable in Colyvan's argument: they are claimed to be indispensable for the purpose of formulating our best scientific theories.  Now, assuming that ``purpose'' here is in some sense transitive (if it is not, then the scientific realist has already avoided Colyvan's claim), and that one of the purposes of our scientific theories is to explain (which seems an uncontroversial claim in this context), then the fate of the scientific realist hinges upon exactly how the transfer of purpose takes place.  But now that we have a clear idea of what is needed is seems that the scientific realist can, whilst holding all of the principles expounded above to be true, easily give an account of how they come to believe in the existence scientific entities but not mathematical ones: namely, that they are not explanatory holists --- they do not hold that mathematical and scientific entities both play the same explanatory role.  Furthermore, this claim can be expounded in a clear and detailed way in terms of the different properties of mathematical and scientific entities.

_Bringing it All Together - A Case Study_

*green I'll add this later - probably using an e.g. from Colyvan so as to avoid controversy.*
----
ChrisWilcox