christopher.wilcox@anu.edu.au
(We've had some spam issues so please e-mail me for password if you want to edit stuff.)
----
*Project Statement*

In his book, The Indispensability of Mathematics, Mark Colyvan (http://homepage.mac.com/mcolyvan/colyvan.html) gives a clear and apparently persuasive argument for Platonism on the basis of the ..Quine-Putnam indispensability argument.  Unfortunately, I believe that he fails in his attempt for X main reasons.  These reasons can largely be grouped into two categories: those arising from concerns regarding the ontological commitments of Quinean naturalism; and those arising from concerns regarding the applicability of IBE in a mathematical context.
----
# Chris.Wilcox-Thesis.Outline
A little rough at the moment.
----
*Management Type Stuff*

_To Do (broad directions)_
- 1. Develop outline and first draft of thesis
- 2. Return to Colyvan and Lipton.
- 3. Fill in any gaps.
----
*Building Blocks*

Colyvan.Indispensability
The core argument I am reacting to.

Inference.to.the.Best.Explanation
A basic outline of IBE.

Mathematical.Antirealism
Attempting to deal with variations on Dummett.

Yablo.Ontology
Pointing out some problems with Quine's ontology.

Price.Naturalism
Pointing out some more problems with Quine's ontology.

Non.Deductive.Mathematics
Paseau on the role of induction and the uncertainty of deduction in mathematics.

Bandu.on.IBE.in.Mathematics
An attempt to refute the use of IBE in platonist arguments.

Price.Naturalism.Without.Representationalism
A ..new-fangled kind of naturalism without the ontological worries.

Lipton.IBE
A more detailed look at IBE.
*green I'm working my way through this book but I think it'll be more useful to discuss things as I go along rather than try to recall everything I wanted to deal with along the way at the end.*

Carnap.Empiricism.Semantics.Ontology
Carnap's reaction to the realism debate.

Quine.On.What.There.Is
What ontology is for Quine.

Stanford.Concepts
Coming to terms with the range of issues concerning concepts.

Sober.Mathematics.and.Indispensability
Sober's attempt to argue against Quine's confirmational holism.

Maddy.Indispensability.and.Practice
Maddy criticising the decriptive accuracy of confirmational holism in a couple of ways.

Resnik.Scientific.vs.Mathematical.Realism
Resnik responds to Maddy and Sober, formulating a pragmatic indispensability argument.

On.Field.Scientific.Theory.And.Practice
Me trying to work out whether distinguishing between practical and theoretical indispensability has any implications for Field's argument.

On.The.Involvement.of.IBE
Me trying to sort out the different ways in which I need to approach the use of IBE in the indispensability argument.

Colyvan.Redux
A return to Colyvan's book with a view to seeing exactly how my arguments and his connect.

Stanford.Abstract.Objects
Gathering material for one of my major criticisms re: what it means for an object to be abstract.

----
*Other Projects*
Other stuff I have to work on during the honours year.  

Williamson.Reading.Group
Notes for my 5,000 word paper (and the associated reading group) on Williamson's The Philosophy of Philosophy.

Seminar.Paper.2
Continental ethics using Critchley's "Infinitely Demanding" as a starting point.

Seminar.Paper
Dealing with ..McDowell's Mind and World, in particular the metaphilosophy.

Metaphysics.Paper
Assessing Dummett's ..anti-realism.

Metaphysics.Tutorials
In desperate need of updating, sometime, somehow...
----
*Other Other Projects*

More ..pie-in-the-sky type stuff.

.Metajustification

Important.Similarities.and.the.Problem.of.Grue

.Existence

The.Limiting.Mechanism.in.Subject.Naturalism

Using.Conceptual.Receptivity.in.Argument

.Similarity

Induction.Universals.Particulars

Post.Honours.Reading

Skepticism.about.mathematics

Philosophical.discourse.as.continuous.not.discrete

Role.of.philosophy.in.science.and.maths
----
*Construction Zone*

A building space for various position-statement pages.  I'll move them to the "Building Blocks" section when I think they have been developed enough to be worth looking at by anyone apart from me.

_High Priority_

.Realism

Van.Fraassen.on.IBE
*green On hold until I work through Lipton's book.*

_Low Priority (not directly related to topic)_

Mathematical.Constructivism

Social.Constructivism.About.Mathematics
----