
----
2008-08-16 11:59:14 EST



[[[break]]]added at line 0: *lime {code By zanovar, from http://zanovar.livejournal.com/29271.html, 29/10/2006:
----
The universe we live in seems almost miraculous. It is a universe filled with intricate complexity; from the wonder of a spiral galaxy down to to minute beauty of a snow flake. Modern science's ability to explain so much can sometimes lead us to take this wondrous intricacy for granted. However, if even the slightest changes were made to the laws of fundamental nature were changed life as we know it could not exist.

A slight change to the weak and strong nuclear forces would make nuclear weaponry impossible. The melt down in chernobyl and the deaths of thousands from radiation poisoning were made possible by this fine tuning. Water is a unique chemical with many unusual properties. If its frozen form didn't float then the Titanic could never have collided with an iceberg. The ability of water to dissolve almost anything allows it to dissolve a number of chemicals fatal to life. Life as we know it requires carbon and yet the existence of carbon or even atoms themselves are the result of coincidences so unlikely as to be staggering. Yet the formation of this carbon is essential for us to have a universe in which life can evolve, suffer and ultimately die. It is also amazing that cosmic radiation has the capacity to mutate DNA. This too is an amazing coincidence. Under slightly different laws of physics there would be no evolution or mutation. In such a universe there would be no anti-biotic resistant bacteria, leukemia or muscular dystrophy. There are literally thousands of deadly, demeaning and debilitating diseases that could not exist were it not for this fact. Were it not for the ability of radiation to mutate DNA no child would die in its mother's arms of leukemia. No poor African would be forced to die due to their inability to afford the new antibiotics necessary to cure their resistant tuberculosis. A lack of evolution would lead to a universe without parasitic wasps that lay eggs inside the bodies of spiders condemning them to being eaten from the inside out. The slightest change to the laws of fundamental physics would create a universe devoid of intelligent life capable of appreciating the misery inherent in existence.

The fact that the universe is so exquisitely suited to create untold misery is surely a fact of deep significance. To explain the horror inflicted by an uncaring universe on so many innocents I have developed the misanthropic principle. There are four forms of the misanthropic principle which I will now explain.

The Strong Misanthropic Principle: The universe was created by god so that intelligent beings would suffer.

The Weak Misanthropic Principle: If the universe were without pain there would be no reason for intelligence to evolve. Hence a universe with observers must be a painful one.

The Participatory Misanthropic Principle: Intelligent life is necessary in order to bring about suffering.

The Special Misanthropic Principle: The universe exists to make YOU suffer.
}*