There seems a number of interesting threads here that have relevance for debates within EBM:
Is EBM a science?  Is EBM a science reducible to biology? How does a philosphy of experiment differ for EBM cf experimental biology? The role of epistemic norms (normative naturalism) in EBM?

Ch2 Reductionism
Good intro to the reductionist debate.  Argues for a strong (but particular) sense of reductionism within biology; notably that the biological laws are actually applications of physiochemical laws---there are no independent laws of biology (at least in the areas of experimental biology which he is concerned; proximal biology).

Ch4 Theory testing
Interesing case---ox-phos controversy in biochemistry; examines the question of which tests were required before the chemiosmostic theory could overturn the chemical theory.  
Explores bayesianism, albeit in a very simplified form.  Critical of the level of subjectivity; possible to reconstruct the ox-phos controversy but argues that it is possible to reconstruct almost anything.  There are some good points here but probably just the same as arguments against Dorling.  A more interesting question (for me) is to clarify why Bayesianism is good in clinical trials; does my intuition of intersubjective priors hold up; what are the differences when we get quantitative (there seems to be many---and the discussion in this book may be helpful for getting a feel)
Discussed Mayo; approvingly but fairly simplistically.  Feels that Mayo falls down due to the requirement of probability for test severity.  His own position rejection probability entirely---but remains "Mayoian" though with a focus on biological research (withi its own particularities).

Ch5 Experimental systems & New Experimentalism
Good dicussion around context of discovery vs context of justification (and how the distinction is on the whole unhelpful).  Puts forward New Experimentalism as holding (i) experiment serves purposes other than theory testing (ii) experimentation has its own internal stability which may survive major theory change (iii) highlights the distinction between observation and experimentation and (iv) propose the co-evolution of theories and experiments cf theory first then experiment (v) philosophy of experiment is able to answer some of the questions of philosophy of science
Weber then uses ox-phos as an example of an experimental systems approach (which confirms most of the above points)
Great discussion on roles of epistemic norms; and the  importance of epistemic norms inconjunction with a experimental systems approach in experimental biology.  Also important is the discussion on the interweaving of local settings (choice of experimental system and how that relates to the genesis of research questions) and universal standards in epistemic norms.  Argues for a Laudan's normative naturalism (need to chase).