http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2008/04/01/2204417.htm



*Study links housing stress to 'shrinking' Sydney brains*

By Science Online's Anna Saleh



The study, *pink published in the Australasian Psychiatry journal*, is the first scientific study into the long-standing rivalry between Australia's most populous cities.

Royal Melbourne Hospital neuropsychiatrist Dennis Velakoulis and his team scanned the brains of *pink 20 Sydneysiders and 20 Melburnians* to look for differences in brain structure.

"We've always suspected there's a difference between Sydney and Melbourne people, so we thought we'd take a scientific approach to this question," Dr Velakoulis said, whose team consists of six Melburnians and a single Sydneysider.

In their study, Dr Velakoulis and the team used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to study the thickness of grey matter, or 'cortical thickness', of the anterior cingulate cortex.

This is a part of the brain that helps control decision-making and moods.

*pink Without knowing which city's residents they were imaging at the time*, the researchers found that residents of Melbourne had a statistically thicker layer of grey matter.

The researchers *pink corrected for age*, as the older you get the thinner your grey matter is likely to be.

"Even when we did that, the thickness was still thicker in Melbourne than in Sydney," Dr Velakoulis said.

The researchers also controlled for intracranial volume, since the taller someone is the bigger their overall brain will be.

*Stress shrinks brains*

The researchers wanted to test the theory that the differences between Sydney and Melbourne brains were from stress, which evidence suggests can cause a thinning of the grey matter in the anterior cingulate cortex.

They first looked at the influence of financial stress by calculating the median house prices in each city and correlating this with cortical thickness.

The median property price in Melbourne in 2005 was $347,000, but it was $517,000 in Sydney.

"The greater the median house price the less the cortical thickness," Dr Velakoulis said.

*Sporting, academic success*

The researchers also looked at how sporting and academic success differed between Sydney and Melbourne.

They found that since 1960, Melbourne has had 37 Australian Football League (AFL) premierships whereas Sydney only had one - in 2005.

This was when the Sydney Swans defeated the West Coast Eagles, Dr Velakoulis said, who declares a possible conflict of interest as a Sydney Swans supporter.

Melbourne also has had more National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) grants awarded to its researchers than Sydney, the researchers found.

The higher house prices and relatively poor sporting and academic performance all adds up to stress that is likely to be responsible for the thinning grey matter in Sydney brains, they said.

*Competing hypotheses*

Dr Velakoulis says the lone Sydney-based member of the research team suggests another interpretation for the differences between Sydney and Melbourne brains.

He says that as a brain matures, it gets rid of unnecessary connections and becomes more efficient.

"It could be that Sydneysiders are much more mature and refined and thus have gotten rid of unnecessary brain connections but therefore, have a thinner but more efficient cortex," Dr Velakoulis said.

Such efficient brains would have less need for NHMRC grants, which would subsequently flow to those relatively 'deprived' Melbourne brains, the researchers say.

Mature Sydney brains would also attach less importance to simple sporting achievements, they add.

Dr Velakoulis says his team hopes to conduct further tests on this hypothesis with money from the AFL. He also hopes to follow up the same group of people in a longitudinal study.

This is important, given that Melbourne housing prices are catching up to Sydney's and could also be leading to a shrinkage in Melburnian brains, Dr Velakoulis said.

*green I guess this is evidence that I've learned something so far in this course. Obviously this has been published by being part of the top-tier of evidence - but the study is worse than laughable. 40 people studied? Imagine how many different causes are at work? Even if they'd done 10,000 people the conclusions about sporting success and house prices would be absurd

I can only hope this is an April Fools joke :) On that note, i'm worried that Jason's sickness may be a joke as well...*.

-Greg.Sadler

here is the reference for the paper they are talking about:

*blue A tale of two cities: a neuroimaging investigation of Melbourne-Sydney rivalry comparing cortical thickness in healthy adults
Year:  2007 
Journal:  Australasian Psychiatry 
Volume:  15 
Issue:  1 
Page numbers:  67-71 
Author(s):  D VELAKOULIS, A FORNITO, M WALTERFANG, G S MALHI, M YUCEL, C PANTELIS 


from pam.*

Thanks Pam :) As an aside, it turns out that Jason's sickness WAS some kind of sick joke. I wonder if he knows the 'if the joke is after noon the fool is on the person pulling the prank' rule. Which I guess is proved if no one went to the class :p

What I'm wondering is whether the request to bring hats to class on Wednesday is all part of the joke...

*red I think even year 9 science students could explain all the parts of this study that are bad science. I can't believe it was published in a respected journal!

Was Jason's sickness a joke? I didn't go to that lecture. Oh dear :-/ (and I was wondering, cause he looked perfectly healthy at ten am) ... u4309050*

i dont know i dont get it.  damn philosophy making me question everything. :(  &#9829; pam

*purple  Greg has it on this one - the ABC site has the following at the bottom of the article (which was published April 1.)

"EDITOR'S NOTE: The original study 'A tale of two cities: a neuroimaging investigation of Melbourne-Sydney rivalry comparing cortical thickness in healthy adults' by Velakoulis, et el, appears in the humour section of Australasian Psychiatry." 

I call it lazy journalism.  They should relish the chance to come up with their own April Fool's joke, rather than rehash year-old jokes.  No more on this; that would be ethics, not philosophy of science :-)  

(Unless it tells us something about the status that science has.  Many of these types of jokes touch on some aspect of science.) 

Tony*

*green phew! my faith in neuroscience is restored.  :)

pam.

ps.  bringing it back to philosophy of science this incident reminds me of a bit i read in a nice little book that had a bit about textually analysing journal articles.  The book was: Woolgar, S.  (1988).  Science: the very idea, Ellis Horwood Limited: Sussex, England. And it was on page 75. 

It talked about the way (and I'm paraphrasing) features of textual organization can provide the reader with instructions for making sense of the text with the which they are faced.  Eg.  Appearance in a ‘serious’ academic journal, is to be read as authoritative fact rather than fiction.  The book also talked about the way we attribute authority of the text because the authors allude to the involvement of others in their scientific community to give the paper credibility.  

Finally, it also emphasised the way scientists write their papers as if 'the facts' pre-exist the text by using externalising devices – ie. scientific papers are written in a textual voice which "renders the actions of the scientist passive, and depicting entities like observations, results, information, etc as the prime movers.  The dilemma central to the whole tradition of scientific reporting is that scientist themselves are responsible for the reporting.” 

Similarly, in this instance we got confused because the authority of being printed in a peer reviewed journal by academics at Melbourne uni conflicted with the content of the paper.  It illustrates that how scientific information is communicated (a social thing) influences our evaluations of scientific information.   wow that was a long ps. :) *

*red Yeah ... that is really interesting. It shows that you get pre-conceived ideas about what you're about to read before you read it that will completely change the way you understand what is written. It is pretty impossible to read things completely objectively.

It is almost the same when you are having a discussion/debate with someone. Your respect for the person goes a long way - you would take understanding from a discussion with a ten year old child very differently to one with a lecturer. This is the bit that is similar to whether you are reading a respected scientific journal or a teenager's blog.

Another thing is your ideas about your own ideas and theirs (if that makes sense), they change the way you process the information and come out at the end with a new idea. If you are very committed to a theory it will make you skeptical and invent arguments that say why the thing you are reading is wrong (instead of evaluating it on its own merits).

In a discussion, if you are very resistant to an idea (maybe because you were brought up with the enemy idea) you would take understanding from someone who had that idea very differently to if you were not particularly committed to an idea and could look at both sides equally.

Anyway, do you think it is possible to gain understanding from written text or a discussion completely objectively and weigh up the options all on their own merits? Or will pre-conceived notions and committments always cloud your judgement? And is it an ideal situation that no one is committed to anything (or can remove themselves from that comittment during discussions)?*

