People who don't study physics might be a bit confused about the last lecture, so maybe those of us who have can help those that haven't. I'll go first, then you add your stuff on top. 

The wave function of a particle is just an equation that shows what it looks like as a wave. For example in one dimensional space it might be y = sin x. It'll have an x and y axis, the x axis being the position and the y axis being the amplitude.

The magnitude of the amplitude roughly says how likely the particle that this function belongs to is going to be found here.

The wavefunction could look like anything: a wavepacket, a big square (probability equal anywhere inside) or a spike (it's definitely there) or a long spread out sine wave or anything.

So our particle is quite happy not really being sure where it is ... until someone comes along and makes a measurement. Then, there is suddenly no possibility whatsoever that it can be found anywhere except where it has been measured to be at. So the wavefunction changes to a big spike where it was measured, with the spike = 1 in area. That's collapse. If the wavefunction were to continue being the way it was, either the measurement equipment is faulty or the particle is lying to the measurer ... because he definitely saw it in one place only.

Everything has a wavefunction, and groups of things have one wavefunction too if we stand outside them, because you can just add two functions together to get a new function. We have to stand outside or else we become part of the system.

The cat and atom together have a wavefunction, and they are so linked that the collapse is either around the cat being dead or the cat being alive. The function looks something like a 50% spike at two places. The guys in the rocket ship become part of a new wavefunction if we step outside them. 

The whole point of the thought experiment was to link the collapse of a tiny thing with no consequences so people didn't care, into something where the collapse was very meaningful and real and made the weirdness obvious (if it hadn't been already).

*crimson Thanks!  Who are you?  Don't you want marks?

Just to be clear: the explanation above is all in terms of the Copenhagen interpretation.

Jason*