I'd like to briefly expand on what I just said in the tute regarding the importance of consciousness - specifically the importance of my consciousness.

I'll start with a caveat: I'm not religious and not advocating any kind of spirituality.

The main philosophical disagreement I have with my science-friends is that I approach the world by thinking "There is me, I observe things... etc". My science-friends approach the world by thinking "There is a world, I'm part of the world, I observe things..." In our discussions this sometimes leads to philosophical disputes, and when I explain my position I get blank stares from science-people and knowning-nods from the philosophically inclined. Much like in the tute today.

So what am I saying, and what does in mean for quantum physics?

Basically, I think. My thoughts and, within them, me experiences presuppose everything (even the grey matter that produces those thoughts). And that world exists as I experience, and if I don't experience it only exists to the extent that I experience results of it.

For quantum physics, I'm more than happy for the entire world to be 'uncollapsed' until the moment I observe it. I'm happy for all of the past to be uncollapsed. I'm happy for the results of your experiment to be uncollapsed until I learn about them. It's not just consciousness that can collapse systems, it's only MY consciousness that can do it. I think that my observation changes everything. For instance, I can't die because my observation requires me to be alive. (Were I to be dead, I couldn't be dead in any relevant sense because there would be no universe for me to be dead in)

Greg.Sadler
---
Greg, we touched on this in the tute today but I thought I’d try and illiterate my issues with your theory in clearer terms here on the discussion board. The two problems I have with this take on the nature of things are:

1) Firstly, if your observations do change everything, then can you propose a mechanism by which the matter of your consciousness can interact with and change characteristics of physical matter? In other words what is the intermediate between the chemicals in your head observing something and the changing of properties of the physical world? My opinion of mind as being completely reducible to the chemical and physical interactions in our brains might be contentious, but I think this argument holds even when someone insists mind is of a separate substance to matter. If I said my mind was made of “spirit” say, then there would still be the issue of how that substance interacts with matter. I’m straying off topic here but to return to my point, if it is possible to produce a mechanism for the way consciousness can influence physical reality then how can we test it by empirical experience? The closest I think any one has come is that prayer experiment (http://www.evolutionary-philosophy.net/review_god_delusion.html) Richard Dawkins talks about, which of course came up with absolutely no results.  

2) Secondly, a point Iain made in the tute today which I thought was quite good (I hope I’m not misquoting you Iain – correct me if I am!). If consciousness is what’s required to collapse the different probability states of the universe then what happened before consciousness existed? If things only started collapsing when consciousness came on the scene and started making observations then it isn’t clear why one needs to invoke consciousness at all, because the universe created consciousness and therefore has a mechanism by which to collapse itself, making consciousness an unnecessary intermediate. This point is a bit of a mouthful, but when I heard it in the tute today I thought it was quite brilliant. I hope someone can express it more clearly. 

-- *crimson There's a very good novel about this.  I know it's a bit odd to be recommending a novel in a philosophy course, but it's by a VERY clever writer.  It's ``Quarantine'' by Greg Egan.  Jason*

I think that existence precedes essence, so all our experiences and thoughts must always come after our actual physical coming into being. Even if therefore your thoughts could change physical reality, I think that it is not clear how they could do so before you existed because before you physically existed your essence didn’t exist either.  This is where I need clarification, how can your thoughts precede your grey-matter? 

Thanks for your time, 
Lorenzo. 
Just to quickly sketch my response, I'll flesh this out later.

1) Consciousness interacting with matter. 

I think this is only a problem if we're approaching the question from "There is a world, and within it we find a brain, and within that there is a mind produced". When we put consciousness first, it doesn't much matter if that consciousness happens to discover a world in which it can't cause anything, or a world which is deterministic. (I think of consciousness essentially as something bolted on to humans as animals. It takes credit for the actions of the animals "Look at it moving, I'm doing that!" when it's really not)

2) What of History?

The universe didn't exist until I became conscious. Sometimes it's useful to imagine history to help me predict and understand unfolding events - but it never 'really happened' and it certainly doesn't exist now.

Again, the problem is only a problem if you put world before mind. I'm proposing that mind comes first.


Philosophy of science
Hi Hope this is working, since the lack of this pages existence before I used it could of been a problem except that those before had observed this page and provided instructions for its use and before that someone somewhere was able to be creative and designed webct discussion boards. In fact it appear that my existence is irrelevant to events happening but my existence isn't irrelevant to me. This bring me to my point. I believe the world does come before the mind but as a human I can choose whether I want to consider the history of events or not. If I only want to assume that my observations bring an event into existence than how do I live in a world full of so many things I didn't create. Like Greg (I hope I have interpreted you right) I also can appreciate that my own conscious state affects my experiencing of events. But my conscious state isn't necessary for the probability of an event occurring.
Jenny Hockley    

I'd say that an event hasn't 'occurred' unless it has some impact on me. So I could be sitting at home rolling dice. But, for your universe, no probabilistic event is occurring until that dice rolling enters the purview of your universe.

Greg.Sadler 

This is ace, it's so interesting how there are people who match up with the categories in the textbook - Lorenzo is being a scientific realist while Greg is being an ideaist (i think, sorry if i've misinterpreted/I don't want label you *red - I don't think you're labelling, you said of each "being a" not "is a"*).  It is interesting to think about the empirical instrumentalists (I think that was the term, my textbook is not nearby and I only skimmed the chapter) though, and whether thinking as a scientific realist is necessary:  Is holding the concept of a mind-independent reality in our minds (hehehe) necessary for furthering our ability to predict and manipulate our reality?  

On the other hand I am reminded of Shakespeare "nothing is either good nor bad,  *green only thinking makes it so*" and william james "Why should we think upon things that are lovely? Because *green thinking determines life*. It is a common habit to blame life upon the environment. Environment modifies life but does not govern life. The soul is stronger than its surroundings"

As to the prayer experiment you described Lorenzo, what would be more interesting would be seeing whether people who THINK people are praying for them improve in health, in comparison to a control.  In fact I think there was a psychology experiment quite similar to this, and people who thought people were praying for them did improve in health, but I would have to hunt it down (and check that it was randomised controlled haha)

 - Pam.

*blue I'm happy for the results of your experiment to be uncollapsed until I learn about them. It's not just consciousness that can collapse systems, it's only MY consciousness that can do it.* I like your view greg, but I have some questions: Do you think that other minds can collapse things ie can I collapse the results of my experiment without you? So that the results are collapsed for me but not for you? I take this to be your view, however, if this is the case then it might be necessary to draw the line somewhere between what can and what can't collapse a wavefunction.... On second thought, it probably isn't because you can just say "Everything that I haven't observed is uncollapsed" regardless of whether its been observed elsewhere. What you would have to accept is that our observations conform (so that if I collapse the results of my experiment you will find them collapsed in the same way). Wow, that paragraph didn't really go anywhere.

May I say that even idealists can believe in an observer-independant world. For instance you can say that "I have thoughts and perceptions etc." and then from these thoughts and perceptions form a hypothesis: "There is an external world which is somehow related to my thoughts and perceptions" and if this conforms to your experience then theres no real problem (as far as I can see). But this means that scientiic realism and idealism aren't necessarily incompatible.

Matt

*crimson Matt, on that last point: I think it's a very good point, but it depends on what you mean by ``external'', doesn't it?  As you probably know, Berkeley, one of the most famous and best idealists, thought that there was a world of physical objects, external to any particular person but contained in the mind of God.

For people who haven't studied idealism: it's the theory that everything is mental.

Jason*


What course is this? Philosophy of science? Metaphysics? Philosophy of mind? Surely there are enough philosophical issues that relate directly to scientific matters to keep us busy for the duration of the course. This is a discussion page, fair enough, and all the issues raised are interesting and whatever, but why don't we all try to keep on point? Contemporary metaphysics is being taught this semester, so why not take these concerns there? Many of the postings under most of the other headings also seem to be going down the metaphysics road.

*purple 1) Classes have yet to get stuck into philosophical issues - we're still talking about scientific cases studies, the nuances of which a lot of people, my self included, don't understand and aren't interested in.

2)There is no real need to keep to the point on a discussion board. If this was a discussion in a class, you would be right. Note that the original topic stemmed from an issue in a tutorial that was taken here specifically to not waste people's time.

3) There is overlap between metaphysics and philosophy of the mind into the philosophy of science. You shouldn't demarcate certain issues as 'belonging elsewhere' when they also go to the topic at hand. If all scientists assume scientific realism, and there are weaknesses with scientific realism, that is a very relevant issue with science in general.*

*blue I'm glad I allow anonymous posts!


I'll adjudicate on what's relevant if you really need me to, but I don't think you're going to need that.

Jason*

RelevantQuote


On the topic of consiousness interacting with matter, you don't need the concept of consciousness at all if you use ththe relativistic point of view; the world is different for exvery particle, everything that it can't interact with (see inside) is one big uncollapsed wavefunction, everything that it can it can see the individual wavefunctions and alter them, and to other particles that are outside the first one, it is just part of the system of the stuff number one can interact with.

Since your brain interacts with every particle of your body in some way, it has the point of view of every particle. So the brain sees things collapsing every time your body interacts with something, giving the illusion of the "consciousness" doing something.

Like if you poke something and see it collapse, other people outside just see one wavefunction with you and the something all part of it, a new equation describing everything that's happening inside.

So with this you don't need to worry about any such concept of consciousness and what it does or whether viruses or antelopes have it ... I want someone to argue against this to see if it's an ok interpretation. Someone?

-u4309050

-- *crimson That's a nice simple theory, but I don't see how it could account for the ..double-slit experiment.  Jason*

-
I am really glad this thread has blossomed into such an interesting discussion and so I would like to quickly say a couple of things over my bowl of veal tortellini. Firstly, to address Greg's points (which i found very thought provoking) and hopefully to the satisfaction of our ghostly critic, i should remark that in my opinion, the sort of claims that Greg is making about the universe can't really be said to be scientific. In saying this i am taking falsification as the criterion of demarcation between scientific theories and metaphysical theories (falsifiable that is in an empirical sense). I think that the particular description of reality which Greg has presented me with cannot be falsified and is therefore not a scientific theory. It cannot be falsified because it seems to me to be un-testable by empirical experience. The reason i think that it is not helpful (in a philosophical sense – I am making normative claims now) to accept ideas like the one Greg speaks of is that if they are wrong, they will continue to be so forever. This is because unless we can falsify at least parts of a theory, we cannot hope to improve on it and expand our knowledge (perhaps these are pre-khunian assumptions about science? I can’t wait to find out).

So this is why i disagree with the idea on scientific grounds. On metaphysical grounds i would also raise some issues, many of which i stated in my first post, for example how this substance of mind can communicate with matter and vice versa. More importantly i mentioned that it seems to me arbitrary to just decided to start with ourselves at the centre - i see no reason why this is a compelling choice. 

If we are to discuss metaphysics then allow me to quote some one that i think answers the questions we are speaking about with soul shattering clarity. I’ve taken the following from Bakunin’s essay "God and the State" (Original text: http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/bakunin/works/godstate/ch01.htm), i think the following sums up well my intuitive objections to the idealist picture of the world:

"[The system of the idealists is] is the reversal of all human experiences and of that universal and common good sense which is the essential condition of all human understanding, and which, in rising from the simple and unanimously recognized truth that twice two are four to the sublimest and most complex scientific considerations - admitting, moreover, nothing that has not stood the severest tests of experience or observation of things and facts - becomes the only serious basis of human knowledge. 
Very far from pursuing the natural order from the lower to the higher, from the inferior to the superior, and from the relatively simple to the more complex; instead of wisely and rationally accompanying the progressive and real movement from the world called inorganic to the world organic, vegetables, animal, and then distinctively human - from chemical matter or chemical being to living matter or living being, and from living being to thinking being - the idealists, obsessed, blinded, and pushed on by the divine phantom which they have inherited from theology, take precisely the opposite course. They go from the higher to the lower, from the superior to the inferior, from the complex to the simple. They begin with God, either as a person or as divine substance or idea, and the first step that they take is a terrible fall from the sublime heights of the eternal ideal into the mire of the material world; from absolute perfection into absolute imperfection; from thought to being, or rather, from supreme being to nothing. When, how, and why the divine being, eternal, infinite, absolutely perfect, probably weary of himself, decided upon this desperate salto mortale is something which no idealist, no theologian, no metaphysician, no poet, has ever been able to understand himself or explain to the profane. All religions, past and present, and all the systems of transcendental philosophy hinge on this unique and iniquitous mystery." (I should mention that i think *pink Bertrand Russell* would have much more clever and philosophically sound things to say about this but i just can't find the book i'm looking for!!!! [I'm thinking of his history of western philosophy, if any one gets a chance i'm sure idealism will be in the glossary])

It's no wonder then that Bakunin starts his book with what to him seems like a rousing call to common sense:
 
"Who is right, the idealists or the materialists? The question, once stated in this way, hesitation becomes impossible. Undoubtedly the idealists are wrong and the materialists right. Yes, facts are before ideas; yes, the ideal, as Proudhon said, is but a flower, whose root lies in the material conditions of existence. Yes, the whole history of humanity, intellectual and moral, political and social, is but a reflection of its economic history." 
Once again thanks to every one for contributing to this very interesting discussion. Pam, I would be very interested to learn more about the studies you talked about (by the way, those were beautiful quotes and i agree with you 100% - thinking determines life). The only thing I regret is that my tortellini have become cold!

Lorenzo. 

Thanks for that :) I’ve had a bash at a response in three parts which I think go to your three essential points. 

If I wanted to give a very short synopsis of the gist of the essence of core of the heart of what lies at the centre of what we’re getting at, I’d say that there is no split between our positions that prevents us from engaging in science in Kuhn’s sense. There’s no reason here to disagree about what things exist, what can be asked of those things and how questions can be asked of those things.


*purple 1) Falsification*

I’m perhaps happy to concede that my claims aren’t falsifiable. I mean, if you could devise a test to show me that you experience the world in the same way I do, I would be happy to concede the entire debate. But I can’t think of any way in which you could illustrate your humanity in that sense (you might be leaning towards some sort of brain function test).

-- *green I think you mean consciousness or subjectivity rather than humanity.  It's up to you what you mean.  But probably you think that my alpacas have a point of view in the same way that Lorenzo or I do.  Admittedly they don't do much science.  But then nor do a lot of humans.  Jason*

I think such a world view does offer some ‘normative’ guidance to the direction of scientific investigation. Or at least some cause to pause for thought while assuming scientific realism

*purple 2) Charges of inconsistency with science or primitivism*

I’d like to briefly stress that this view (which we appear to be calling idealism) in no way precludes science. It’s very useful for me to be able to make accurate predictions about the universe I find myself in. And making such predictions appears to be quite achievable because the universe seems to obey a set of relatively fixed laws (That’s to say, there’s no reason you won’t wake up tomorrow to discover that gravity has given up being a fundamental force – but it hasn’t done so yet). 

So our knowledge is in no way limited by adopting my approach.

*purple 3) Metaphysics and the Substance argument (for the philosophically inclined)*

I’ve run the substance argument previously with respect to Spinoza. It’s kind of fun to throw around in philosophical debates, but to be honest I’m not sure it amounts to much. The limited interaction between substances is built on a hardline technical definition of substance.

For people who haven’t studied it much, I’ll give it a quick run down. The word (or something to the effect there of) ‘substance’ has been around for donkey’s years (think Plato). It was originally sort of synonymous with ‘thing’. So you were one substance, and your chair was another. But that definition wasn’t overly helpful. So the word shifted to mean something like ‘tangible universe’. So because you and the chair are roughly the same kind of thing, you’re part of the same substance. Anything that can have causal relationships with other things is the same substance. This limited the word to 4 possible referents: 1) the stuff around us 2) God 3) The Mind 4) other universes, planes of existence, transcendent places etc. These things are fundamentally different in some sense, and hence called ‘different substances’. 

This is where arguments like Lorenzo’s get involved. He says ‘ahah! You say God created the universe, how is that possible unless they’re the same substance. If they’re the same substance God can’t have caused or interacted with the universe.’ Or ‘ahah! You say your mind controls your body… how is that possible if…’ This is very useful if, like Spinoza, your entire system is predicated on a hardline definition of substance. (Anyway, everyone ends up concluding that god IS the universe and being pantheists)

But I’m selling Lorenzo short. His point does strike home. I’m saying that my consciousness is the first thing I discover. Then I find that my consciousness is presented with a bunch of sense-data. Then I call that the universe and start to experiment with it. Lorenzo is asking me to then look at my body, which I find constantly present in my universe. He then wants me to look at my brain and realise that the totality of my consciousness is existent in my brain. He then wants me to accept that there are no ‘supernatural’ or ‘cross-substantial’ causes active on my brain. Then he wants me to accept that my brain, and hence me, are equally real. And that there are a bunch of brains in the universe. So he’s proved scientific realism (and that’s a pretty bloody good argument).

How do I rebut this? Firstly by adopting most of it. It’s a valid scientific approach, and I’m not being anti-science in any way. Second, by making one of two moves: I could make something of the emergent properties of my brain; alternatively, I could argue that accepting the above doesn’t harm my position. It doesn’t harm my position because I’m still the ultimate and relevant subject observing the universe from a perspective that is inescapably my own. If I die, the universe still ceases to exist. If I don’t know about something, it still doesn’t happen. Etc

Lorenzo could counter claim that I’ve shifted my position from some kind of idealism to some kind of subjectivism. But I’m not overly concerned.

*purple my question to you*

The question I'd like to ask of scientific realism is _'how can you so easily abstract-away the centrality of your subjectivity?'_ That's to say, the most consistent and ever-present thing about the universe is that it presents itself to (or you discover it in) your consciousness. How can you so offhandedly ignore that central premise or axiom of the universe when you assume the ongoing and objective existence of the laws/matter/constants etc in the universe? 

To me that assumption is equally unfalsifiable and unjustified...

(I wish I could think of a good example where objectivism v subjectivism has come up in a debate about some scientific issue. If I recall I'll post something :p )

-- *green Wigner's interpretation of quantum mechanics is one place.  Jason*

*pink I was just having a debate and stumbled upon a useful example. Discussion related to limited resources, competition and overpopulation. (Someone put some rabbits on an island, rabbits bred like crazy, there was a drought, all the rabbits died)

Imagine you live on an island that has developed a population of 100 people on account of favourable agricultural conditions. A drought hits, and now there is only food to feed 5 people. Because everyone on the island is of roughly equal strength and ability, if you compete for the food (or just share the food) – everyone will die.

Your society decides that, to ensure its survival, it will make 100 pills. 95 will be poisoned. Everyone will take a pill, and the winners will observe the death of 95 people.

As a scientific realist, you’ll be very uncomfortable with this. You’re probably about to die.

As an idealist/subjectivist, I have no problem at all. I know with absolute certainty that my pill won’t kill me. When I observe the outcome of taking the pill, I must be alive to observe the outcome. If I die, the universe doesn’t exist in any sense that allows the question to be answered. 

I guess it’s like saying I’d happily be the cat in the box, but you mightn’t like the idea.*

Greg.Sadler

*blue So if you stick to idealism aren't you making it so you have no predictive capacity? What's the use if we can't predict on the basis of probability and then behave accordingly? 

*red&#9829;* Pam*

My idealist probability calculation is more accurate than your scientific rationalist one. I'll be correct every time. You'll be incorrect 95% of the time (you'll say 'I have a 95% chance of dying', but if you repeat the test 100 times you'll live every time - necessarily) 

Greg.Sadler

I think something has to be clarified here. Greg, i agree with this statement: 

"When I observe the outcome of taking the pill, I must be alive to observe the outcome. If I die, the universe doesn’t exist in any sense that allows the question to be answered" 

This sounds like the anthropomorphic principle and i think sometimes it can be used well(ish) - for example, how do we know that the universe can create life?, because we are alive. I would be happy to take the poison pill (or any sort of pill) on those grounds. What i don't understand is how you can jump from something like this on the one hand, to claims that the universe doesn't exist independently of your mind on the other hand. Just because you aren't observing it doesn't mean it's not there. You could say: 'how do you know it's there?' and i would say, 'well i observe it', and you'd say Ah hah! But on the same note i could say to you: 'the fact that i only see it when i observe it doesn't link its existence to my observation. When i'm not looking there is a chance that it (the universe) either exists or doesn't exist. Now i don't think that's an equal chance because we understand the mechanism by which matter can give rise to consciousness. What we don't understand, and what you haven't explained to me yet (if you do i promise i'll dress in sheets, follow you around chanting and drink Kool-Aid if you tell me) is how mind can influence matter. If it can't then i don't see how your observations can any sort of universe into existence. This means that, even though i can't be 100% sure that the universe continues to exist when i'm not observing, i can make a probability judgement that it most likely does. This is similar to Russell's teapot i spose (sort of). We can't be certain that there isn't a teapot orbiting in the kuiper belt, but that doesn't prove that it is. Without being certain we can make a probability judgement. Of course at this stage one could raise the spectre of induction (even if the universe is there how do you know that it will continue to be so?) and i can't think of how i'd respond to that. One of the reasons i'm doing this course is so i can at least venture an answer in the future. 

Now, as far as abstracting-away the centrality of your subjectivity goes i would say this: Even if i can only know the universe subjectively that still doesn't prove that the universe can't exist objectively of me. I could use exactly the same mechanism as you and say that my brain matter is central to my consciousness, every consciousness has a brain matter behind it, so how can we abstract that away and assume just consciousness? I agree that assuming the ongoing constants of the universe is a large leap of faith (esp. because of induction), but i don't think assuming the objective existence of something universe-like is so problematic. What i spose i'm trying to say about all this is that we can't be certain either way, but i think it is reasonable to make a probability judgement and if we did it seems to me that is there substantial evidence supporting the idea that when i look away the universe is still there. 

Also, i found this cool picture of Russell, i sometimes wish philosophical arguments were as easy as this: http://www.flickr.com/photos/prawnwarp/489186800/in/pool-philolsophers

I should mention, thanks for the speedy replies Greg, i apologise if mine aren't so speedy. 

Lorenzo. 

I should also mention that it is possible to test for the fundamental forces of the universe. For example we know through experiments that electromagnetism is a force with certain characteristics under certain conditions. Now if i said to you: electromagnetism is a force that has these characteristics under these conditions, that statement is completely testable and potentially falsifiable.  

Lorenzo again 

Ah, i see what you mean, i am informed that when you get down enough, at a certain level physicists have to say "force just is" (they say the same thing about charge). I would make the comment though that even this concession doesn't prove the non existence of the universe. There is still something out there that is creating force and the characteristics of that thing are testable (to a certain extent). It should also be mentioned that a lot of these problems are just a function of time, we have to be careful not to worship the god of the gaps because the gaps are getting smaller and smaller. I think a lot of these problems also arise linguistically, ideas like charge and force are completely artificial - convention i spose. The best way to describe it would be to say when a certain cluster of events happen then that cluster of events with common characteristics is assigned the name "charge" or "mass" or "Lorenzo". Now, what i maintain through all this convention and subjective observation is that there is no good reason to suppose that those events can't happen independently of my mind. In fact it makes perfect sense that my mind is a product of different sorts of events, all of which are part of a vast and amazing pool of events called the universe. 

"Brief and powerless is Man's life; on him and all his race the slow, sure doom falls pitiless and dark. Blind to good and evil, reckless of destruction, omnipotent matter rolls on its relentless way; for Man, condemned to-day to lose his dearest, to-morrow himself to pass through the gate of darkness, it remains only to cherish, ere yet the blow falls, the lofty thoughts that ennoble his little day; disdaining the coward terrors of the slave of Fate, to worship at the shrine that his own hands have built; undismayed by the empire of chance, to preserve a mind free from the wanton tyranny that rules his outward life; proudly defiant of the irresistible forces that tolerate, for a moment, his knowledge and his condemnation, to sustain alone, a weary but unyielding Atlas, *red the world that his own ideals have fashioned despite the trampling march of unconscious power."* http://users.drew.edu/~jlenz/fmw.html

Lorenzo for the last time tonight.

*pink I think we're at a pretty fundamental disconnect about this 'mind affecting matter' problem. I don't believe mind means anything other than brain. But I think consciousness means something other than brain. Conscious is the way I am. My brain isn't "I" but my consciousness is. Consciousness is my mode of perceiving the universe. It's the way the universe is produced to me. 

It doesn't bother me at all that consciousness emerges from brain. It doesn't bother me at all that consciousness can't alter brain. All that matters is that I am consciousness and that's how the universe comes to me*

Greg.Sadler

Maybe, i'm sorry if i haven't been very clear. Even so, i think what you said in your last post brings me back to my initial point. Your consciousness emerges from your brain, it is your mode of perceiving the universe. It's the way that the universe 'comes to you'. Those statements imply that there is something that exists external to your consciousness. If this is the case then i think it's plausible that that external thing exists independent of you experiencing it, as if it didn't it wouldn't be 'external'. 

This is hard stuff to grapple with. I was reading our textbook last night and there was a point attributed to Khun and others that reminds me of the difficulties i'm having discussing these things. He was making a point about how, in his opinion, scientific terms do not always have fixed meanings (this stuff is all on pages 117 and 118). Ladyman makes the remark that "On this view... an electron has the same ontological status as say a political party, or a nation state, in the sense that both only exist because people believe they exist". All i could do was write "bugger" in the margin. But anyway, i think one of the problems here could be that we can't even really be sure that we are speaking about the same things - why it all seems so confusing (to me anyway). 

Hopefully later on in the course we can hear some good responses to these problems because at the moment i feel like i've just found out the easter bunny doesn't exist...

Lorenzo

*blue Science is tricky, but the Easter Bunny definitely exists.  That's for certain.

Jason*

*pink I* *green am* *red the* *blue easter* *orange bunny*
*black Lorenzo*

I'm sort of glad the easter bunny doesn't exist. I'm quite happy eating confectionery given to me by my parents; but it wouldn't be prudent to eat confectionery left behind by someone that breaks into your house during the night. 


*purple I wonder how parents can suggest to their children that it's unwise to accept candy from strangers and yet encourage them to eat candy/confectionery from an unknown, anthropomorphic rabbit???*

Don't talk to strangers, but it is quite ok to go and sit on some old guys lap and tell him your name and what you want for Christmas!?! anonymous :P

It's okay, Santa isn't real so he can't possibly molest you 


*purple Maybe Santa isn't real, but some guy impersonating Santa can still molest you - you won't be assuming he's benevelent, so discovering he's prepared to molest you won't be as great a disappointment as if Santa molested you. But the most significant factor is still probably - that you were molested!!!*

The theists in my other course were arguing that for some cultures or societies at some times child molestation is okay. Esp if a benevolent god says it's okay - i.e. Islam.

So maybe getting molested with the authority of a benevolent figment of a societies imagination is okay?