Does anyone else have this problem???? If so, do you have any good techniques for getting to sleep that don't involve medicine or listening to the radio??

Lorenzo

*blue  techniques for getting to sleep:

1) mug of warm milk
2) meditation
3) write down all the things you are thinking of then put the piece of paper in another room (not next to your bed) and you can think about them tomorrow!

*red &#9829;* pam*

Ahh!! The piece of paper idea is great, i'm going to test it out tomorrow. Thanks!
Lorenzo

Ur plan can has flaw. Ams up till sunrise making your lists. 

http://img518.imageshack.us/img518/1796/shrededlistsp7.jpg

-lulcat

*green We definitely has marks for lolcats, but only if they leaves their names.  Jason*


*purple Have you tried reading a really boring book before you turn the lights off? -Sammy*

I have lots of advice to the insomniacs amongst us.

If it is your brain that is the trouble:

If I have trouble sleeping it is usually because I am thinking really hard about things, solving problems, thinking about what I'm going to do tomorrow, worrying ... I recommend getting a diary, and spending half an hour writing down every possible issue that you have been thinking about. Then you feel like everything is resolved, and you can fall asleep easily! :-)

Something else that keeps me awake is light. Try drawing all curtains and face away from your window, and get a draft snake to lie at the bottom of your door, and switch off your computer and face any digital clocks or CD players away from you.

If your mind is still managing to go at a hundred miles an hour ... try doing some cryptics or logic problems before sleeping ... try really really hard ... then your brain will be too exhausted to do anything.

If you get cramps in your legs or feel twitchy and roll around and keep yourself awake that way ...

Go outside and ride around for half an hour, taking particular care to go up steep slopes a lot. Get really really puffed out. Then cool off, stretch, sit down for a few minutes, then try to sleep.

Oh and the mug of warm milk is an excellent suggestion. I don't know why it makes you feel sleepy, but it does.

Something that I've heard about: concentrating eally really hard on just one thing and not being distracted by anything else apparently helps. So, maybe repetitive instrumental music ... or a snuggly, warm affectionate cat under the covers (the only reason I visit home, really:-) ).

u4309050

Thanks very much for the ideas. I sometimes try listening to ABC classic FM, but it doesn't work all the time. Apparently the warm milk works because it contains an amino acid called tryptophan (also in bananas and lots of other things). Tryptophan is the substrate your body starts with when it's synthesising many of your neural transmitters, especially serotonin. They reckon serotonin plays a part in sleep regulation, but it's hard to be certain. On Wikipedia they have a diagram of the synthetic pathway i'm talking about 

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serotonin

hooray for chocolate milk
Lorenzo 

Wow, I used to have to eat a banana before bed every night for years. I just assumed it was a habitual thing that I couldn't break out of. The moar you know!

*blue you could try listening to the BBC news radio.  it is just the news over and over again in a nice british accent. - pam.*  

Pam!!! I've been doing exactly that for the past week (the accent is for some reason soothing) What a coincidence! The only thing that worries me though is this idea that if i fall alseep with the radio on, and it's playing all night every night, i will somehow not get as good a night's rest. Even worse i sometimes worry that it will effect my dreams and my subconscious mind! Does any one know if there is any substance to this or is it just superstision??

Lorenzo

*blue oooohh wow you should learn a language then lorenzo.  put it on the french channel and learn french! hahha.  :)  

it will affect your sleep if it causes you to not get any stage 3 and 4 sleep and move through the cycles properly i guess, so yes, be careful! - pam.*

I thought so! I speak italian but there isn't an italian channel, which is a pitty because I would definitely forego some stage 3 or 4 to listen to italian in my sleep.. I've been doing a bit of browsing though and i found something else that might help! at this website 

http://www.librivox.org 

one can find audiobooks of many of the great philosophical works. I've just downloaded 'the antichrist' by nietzsche: 

http://librivox.org/the-antichrist-by-nietzsche/ 

and 'the problems of philosophy' by my main man Russ: 

http://librivox.org/the-problems-of-philosophy-by-bertrand-russell/

I can't think of a better way to get to sleep then to the sweet serenade of philosophy! 

Hope this helps
Lorenzo. 
