A couple of things i thought people might find interesting. 

Firstly, here is a video trying to help people conceptualise what the dimensions up to and including 10 are like. 

http://www.tenthdimension.com/medialinks.php

Although, according to modern string theory(or M-theory) there are 11 dimensions, does any one else know what the extra one is meant to be? (I can't really understand what it says on wiki... http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M-theory) 
-- *green I think you mean Wikipedia.  There are lots of wikis.  This is a wiki.  Jason*


Secondly, since this week we are dealing with physics in the tutes, i wanted to know if any one knew of any recent developments on the questions thrown up by the EPR paradox. I will outline what i know about it to date in the hope that someone can expand. 

EPR stands for Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, and their paradox was born out of what seemed to be a necessary consequence of the theories of quantum mechanics (the paradox was originally formulated to try and disprove certain aspects of Bohr's principle of complementarity). The problem could be stated as follows: It is possible to obtain a pair of spinning particles (photons or electrons, say) in the same spin system, in which their spins cancel each other out to give a net spin of zero. Suppose we name one of these particles A and the other B and move them very far apart (to opposite ends of the solar system perhaps). After particle A and B are separated, the spin of A is measured and found to have a certain value. It follows that the spin of particle B (on the other end of the solar system) must have the opposite value to particle A, as the spins of the two particles must cancel each other out. Now, according to quantum mechanics, the spin of A has no definite value until it is measured (this ties in with the CAT!), at which point it must produce an instantaneous effect on B, collapsing its spin to a value which cancels with A. It would seem that for this situation to occur one must invoke action at a distance or faster than light communication, both of which are absurd according to the accepted wisdom. The real problem here is to do with Einstein's locality principle, that is if two systems are in isolation from each other for some time then a change to the first should produce no real change in the second (as nothing travels faster than light). 

Bohr responded to this argument by saying that the EPR paradox does not demonstrate the incompleteness of quantum theory, but rather the naïveté of assuming local conditions in atomic systems. So, according to Bohr, the problem here is not to do with the theory itself, but is rather to do with the poverty of our mind's capacity to come up with a principle of locality consistent with the quantum world. There was another bloke called Bell who came up with another solution but I can't quite understand it: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bell%27s_theorem

The big question then is could the fantastic property of non-locality (that seems to be faster than light communication) of atomic particles every be tested and rationalised? If so how?

Does any one with a more cogent grasp of physics know any thing about this, or are they able to explain Bell's ideas in layman's terms? (For a good introduction to all this stuff see "Quantum Theory for Beginners" by McEvoy and Zarate - a bit old but very easy to understand.)

*green That's exactly what the optional further reading is!  See PhilosophyOfScience-FurtherReading.  The link you're looking for there is called ``Einstein and the Quantum Spooks'' by Huw Price.  Jason*

Much appreciated, sorry about long post. 
Lorenzo.

*green THANK YOU for the long post!

Jason*

Response: If anyone is interested, I came up with a good analogy to understand higher dimensions a long time ago.

First of all, a treasure is locked in a 1D space (a line) by two dots. A 2D man can just reach sideways and grab it, without having to destroy the protective dots.

But if this man wants to hide a treasure, he puts it in a 2D box with lines for walls.

If we want to, we can simply reach into the box and take it without disturbing any of the lined walls.

If we want to lock up a treasure, we put it into a box with walls made of planes, but a 4D creature could grab it without touching any of the plane walls.

And so it goes on.

Erin Tewes

*crimson Thanks.  That point about a 4D creature grabbing our stuff is very useful.  We sometimes talk about ``embedding'' something in a higher-dimensional space.  From the point of view of a 4D creature, our box is embedded in her space.  Branes are embedded in a bulk (see the reading brick ... if you've got one!).  Jason*

we have a reading brick? :S

*crimson Whoops!  I was confusing this with another course which Erin's also enrolled in.  :--/ Jason*

phew! :)


Hi Lorenzo

In reference to you query about the 11th dimension, back in 1927, Bertrand Russell, in _An Outline of Philosophy_ (about p. 105, I think - *red I've checked. It's p.163, if anyone is interested.*), said: "Physics is mathematical not because we know so much about the physical world, but because we know so little." Much work has been done since 1927, but I have no doubt that Russell's dictum applies even more strongly today than it did then.

That said, what is the 11th dimension? Mathematicians have no problem with 11 dimensions, or even _n_ dimensions, but the leap to what these might be physically, if anything, is fraught with difficulties. According to John Gribbin (_In Search of Superstrings: Symmetry, Membranes and the Theory of Everything_, 2007 edn [Cambridge: Icon Books], p. 165) on one picture, the Universe was born in an 11 dimensional state, with no distinction between force and matter, or even between different kinds of force. There was just some kind of pure state of 11 dimensional energy, and as this dissipated some of the structures curled up upon themselves to create what we think of as particles, which are waves vibrating in the coiled-up dimensions. Long live Bertand Russell!


Dick Parker

Philosophy of Science ... Poetry of the Universe ... Philosophy of Science ... Poetry of the Universe ... where am I? Confusion reigns, but I don't seem to be getting wet. I think I'm in a self-referential loop, with a hairy fundamental orifice approaching rapidly. Help! Or perhaps it's only the 10th dimension. Whew! Narrow escape there.

-

Dick, thank you very much for your references, especially the reference to Bertrand Russell. I am eager to investigate the document for myself. 
Lorenzo.

-

Lorenzo, I've posted the details of another book, _The Trouble with Physics_ under Poetry.Stuff.Worth.Reading, which you might find very interesting. It's a critique of modern physics, but it contains a lot of clearly written stuff about cosmology, quantum mechanics, quantum gravity, string theory, supersymmetry, etc., and how the whole lot developed, the problems with the various theories, etc. Get it and read it, if you can. I'd highly recommend it to anyone doing this course or Philosophy of Science.

Dick Parker