Physicists who believe the Copenhagen interpretation of QM resolve
the apparent absurdity of a macroscropic object by endowing the
Geiger counter with consciousness. David Griffiths, whom I addressed
as "Prof. Reed" in an e-mail, because I found his e-mail address at
the Reed University website (he addressed me in his reply as "Mr Canberra") *fawn LOL (Jason)*,
states this (in "Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, at p. 431):

"There is something absurd about the very idea of a _macroscopic_ object being in a linear combination of two
palpably different states. ... How are we to reconcile this with
the orthodox interpretation of quantum mechanics?

"The most widely accepted answer is that the triggering of the
Geiger counter constitutes the "measurement", in the sense of the
statistical [i.e. Copenhagen] interpretation, not the intervention
of the human observer. It is the essence of a measurement that some
_macroscopic_ system is affected (the Geiger counter, in this
instance). The measurement occurs at the moment when the microscopic
system (described by the laws of classical mechanics) interacts with
the macroscopic system (described by the laws of classical
mechanics) in such a way as to leave a permanent record."

He then admits that the macroscopic world is made up of lots of
microscopic particles, which are each governed by a wave equation.
I'll come back later because I have to go out running.


Love and cuddles,


u4301824


Response:

I like the relativistic view, i.e. that the wave function is different for all observers. This makes sense because the particle knows where it is, even if most other particles in the universe don't. I don't think one observer can change the particle for everybody. I like the idea that the whole universe has a wavefunction made up of wave functions of all the little bits that make it up, and every time a particle interacts with some of the universe, it sees the individual wavefunctions and can influence them individually without influencing the others. For one particle, everything it can't interact with is one big unknown quantity, including the things inside it that can interact from the inside, now there is no need for the mysterious concept of "observer" or "conscious" - every particle is equal in that respect. We are just a big lump of particles, with a wavefunction, and our brain can interact with every particle in our bodies, thus our brain is the master of the whole wavefunction of our bodies, thus it looks like our brain does the observing ... but really it's just the particles in our bodies either being able to interact with other particles and collapse them (from the point of view of our body-particles -> brain) or not being able to and seeing them as uncollapsed. So anyway, my point was going to be that the cat may be collapsed for the particles that make up the Geiger counter because it interacts with them, but for anything outside the box, that can't interact with the system, the Geiger counter is just part of a big unknown wavefunction lump.

u4309050 (great idea, person above, now I can get marks but not be credited by class members of any silly ideas. Also I wrote the post below, QM)
