Speaking about those people's inability to see sunspots in class yesterday reminded me of the phenomenon "inattentional blindness".

FIRSTLY: Watch this video of people passing a ball around and count how many aerial passes are made:

http://viscog.beckman.uiuc.edu/grafs/demos/15.html

and SECONDLY read the following (paraphrased from wikipedia)

"The most famous study demonstrating inattentional blindness was conducted by Simons and Chabris 1999. Subjects are asked to watch a short video in which two groups of people (wearing black and white t-shirts) pass a basketball back among themselves. The subjects are told to either count the number of passes made by one of the teams, or to keep count of bounce passes vs. aerial passes. In different versions of the video a woman walks through the scene carrying an umbrella, or wearing a full gorilla suit. In one version the woman in the gorilla suit even stops in the middle, faces the camera, and pounds her chest before walking out of the scene. After watching the video the subjects are asked if they saw anything out of the ordinary take place. In most groups 50% of the subjects did not report seeing the gorilla. (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inattentional_blindness)

NOW watch the video again!  Did you miss the gorilla the first time??

Here is the link to the actual paper:  http://www.cnbc.cmu.edu/~behrmann/dlpapers/Simons_Chabris.pdf

Change blindness is a similar phenomenon. This is a link to a great demonstration of it:

http://www.vanderveer.org.nz/research/labs/eyelab/changeblindness/changeblindness1.php

It is amazing the extent to which our cognitive processes mediate how we perceive and interpret the world.  The frame of reference (theory/hypothesis) defines what we are going to pay attention to; influencing our observations in ways we are not even conscious of.  How often are we distracted from seeing things that would significantly alter our interpretation of events, because our attention is directed elsewhere?  

It is particularly interesting when you consider the intensity with which scientists aim for precise measurements and results; in particular, the emphasis on making hypothesis highly specific, and sort of dichotomous in the way we construct hypothesis 1 and pit it against the null hypothesis. We're not very open to other possibilities unless we've got a theory to rest our hypothesis upon. We're sort of wearing blinkers.    

*red &#9829;* pam

*green Cognitive processing in humans is fascinating, and has some interesting implications for science. Of course, it is humans generally, not just scientists, who are looking at the world with blinkers on - and presumably this affects the acquisition of many forms of knowledge, including science. However, as many scientists make a living out of observations, a few special considerations need to be made:
-  The role of theory: The positron example highlights the importance of mathematical theory in shaping our understanding of applied science. The existence of the positron was predicted by mathematics. Pure mathematics has the least association with direct observation of any science, yet it can be an incredibly powerful tool for elucidating structures that are not yet visible to us. Obviously, there are many flaws with using theory to define hypotheses, and this has been addressed in other posts and lectures, - but the value of mathematics as a predictive tool should not be discounted. 
- The role of collaboration: The old stereotype of the brilliant scientist making extraordinary breakthroughs on their own is incredibly rare. The awarding of major prizes to one person, or perhaps two or three people, perpetuates the myth of the scientific hero. In reality, scientific advances are achieved by collaboration. Presumably, each scientist working on a problem faces their own cognitive biases, but I think that a group of people is less likely to miss a salient observation than an individual.*
--- *blue Right, there are some cognitive biases that you're less likely to get in a group ... but there are other cognitive biases, particularly some decision-making biases that you're MORE likely to get in a group.  Jason*
- *green In all of the inattentional blindness experiments I have looked at, a significant proportion of people did see the gorilla, or the body, or whatever. Without necessarily being aware of it, scientists reduce the problem of inattentional blindness by taking on students and post-docs to complete their research programmes. It is important that supervisors encourage their fellow researchers, whatever their experience level, to take their observations seriously and not dismiss new/contradictory findings on the presumption of inexperience. One of my previous supervisors alluded to this; she said that it can be better for honours students if their supervisor is not in the lab every day, looking over their shoulder and interpreting their results for them. 
- It also seems that the more focused and diligent the person (inc scientist), the more likely they are to miss a stimulus outside of the scope of their sensory attention. Perhaps a more casual glance down the microscope would be better!
- On a final note, this all reminds me of the reference to 'young and maverick' scientists who help start a scientific resolution, according to Ladyman/Kuhn. Perhaps it is not only a young person's perceived open-mindedness that induces the new perspective; rather it includes their lack of finely-tuned focus on specific details, and thus an inherent ability to notice pertinent features that are peripheral or invisible to established scientists. 

Mel*

Thank you for your lovely long reply mel, i enjoyed reading it.  i found a bit in a book i'm reading for the assignment that i thought was relevant:

"...considerations of mechanism are not theory independent; they depend heavily on our current knowledge base about the phenomenon, including knowledge of the theories that describe the causal mechanisms that explain the phenomenon.

...*red Scientists group together events [as in cause and effect] not because of perceptual salience but rather because of theoretical or explanatory salience, that is, because of the salience of inferred and unobservable underlying casual mechanisms such as forces, field and particles.*" (p 7 Theory and Evidence by Barbara Koslowski 1996).

from pam.
