I hold romantic notions (and associated reservations) about humans advancing technologically and colonising non-terrestrial bodies in our solar system and beyond (e.g. the moon, mars etc).

I find it unlikely that I will personally participate in such colonisation, so I appreciate the notion vicariously through imagining my descendents or those of my relatives etc. For some reason not well understood by me, this fantasy only holds when I consider the colonisation being achieved by humans (or whatever we may evolve into if it takes that long…and if we persist that long *fawn (probably alpacas -- Jason)*). 

Humans may develop independently replicating, learning/evolving ‘computers’ which exceed human ‘advancement’ and, independently of humans, set about colonising non-terrestrial locales, but I don’t find this notion nearly so romantically appealing.

I wonder: Do others have the same sorts of romantic attachments to the future of humans? What do others think might help explain this anthropocentric romanticism? Is there a significant sense in which I can distinguish between the carbon-based ‘biological’ progeny (‘the fruits of my loins’ or those of fellow humans) colonising the universe, and the silicon-based (or whatever) ‘technological’ progeny (the fruits of my mind or those of other humans) colonising the universe? 
Hamish

EvolutionaryReasonsWhyHumansShouldEvolveIntoAlpacas

*green How many parts of a person can be replaced with cyber parts before the person is nolonger who they used to be? The answer to this may answer your question about the romantic appeal of biological progeny over cyber progeny
TeganLarter*

Seven...definately seven.

Although my more considered response would probably be something like: It depends on how accurately the cyber parts replicate the form and function of the biological originals. If the replication is undetectable then it doesn't matter, even superficially, because it's as is they weren't replaced - though I don't know how this'd be achieved. 

So assuming the replication is imperfect: Which body part/s are replaced and how poorly their form and function are replicated will be major contributers to the ways and extents to which the person is a different one. I'm tempted to say the brain is in a class of it's own, having special significance to personhood. Then I get to a place where I ask about the mind-body problem, which I think goes something like: Is the mind just a manifestation of the sum of the body (or certain parts of it - like the central nervous system) and so reducible to physical explanation? Or is the mind something additional - somehow attatched to the body and able to manipulate it, but not reducible to the biochemical machinations?

Unsurprisingly, I can offer no definitive solution to this problem. But maybe I have a subconscious desire to believe that humans have souls, or some sort of special existential status that can't be replicated...That could explain why I romantically distinguish humans from any cyber-analogue.

No, I've decided it's seven, once you change more than seven; all the romance is gone. 
Hamish

People who are interested in Tegan and Hamish's issue might like Arnold Zuboff's very short story ``The Story Of A Brain''.  I can email you a scanned copy.  mailto:Jason.Grossman@anu.edu.au.


*red To be human:
I think “human” is just a term used to describe something central to our understanding of the world. Much like the term "Life", we change it to suit the flavour of the day, but also much like “life” we struggle with the concept that no term is absolute (so far as I know anyhow) including fundamental stuff. Depending on how you define it, a complex crystal could be identified as a life form or a virus could be defined as not being a life form. In the same way, an alien could define humans only to be those complete and faultless examples of creatures of our species (i.e. No scars or missing appendix). If I were to completely replace myself limb by limb with cybernetic whoosefopsits (technical term) and imprint my consciousness entirely into some other form, I'd still consider myself "human" because it would suit me and suit those who referred to me, not so much because I place more importance in my mind than my body, but more because such distinction is necessary. Even if I now had three arms and no eyes, I don’t see how that would be different to a blind person or someone with a mutation (whom we would hopefully all also call human). 
The brain is just an organ like any other. We place special importance on it because it’s where all the thinking happens but I don’t really see why. I’ve always thought there was some significance to the fact that I am limited to this one creature’s experiences and that that was a good reason to believe in the soul, but there’s no reason to believe that’s not just a phenomenon like many others in animals that make it place importance on its survival. 
I suppose in the end it all depends on how much importance you place on the categorising of things around you. People like to define people as homosexual, bisexual or heterosexual rather than using more complex, gapless models for things, like the Kinsey scale. We need our things in boxes or they seem unacceptably untidy.

Assuming that my points are moot though, seven is definitely on target. The only other option is 42 really, and they’d be expecting that. 

Us in the future:
I like to entertain the notion that someone will stand on Io or Europa before I’m gone. The main reason why I don’t believe this will happen is closely linked to the reason why the word “Europa” is not in the spell checker of my shiny new no-sharp-edges version of MS Word.  A romantic can be a cynic right?
The story by Asimov  which I posted in another thread (ending in Jason directing me here) jumped forward a few stages in human evolution (of a sort) and humanity was just as endearing as I see it now. So long as any future improvements on us are still imbued with a childlike wonder of things and a need to satisfy their curiosity, I don’t find thoughts of future discoveries any less warm and fuzzy. As to the anthropocentric romanticism, if I still remembered any of my psychology I’m sure there’d be something about biological or social psychology that would explain this. 
For me though, the reason would be much more childish. I can’t fantasise about landing on new worlds properly when I have to pretend I’m an amalgamated consciousness confined to a bionic sphere that can’t taste and views the world in microwaves.  :p 

Im sorry this is so long. I know I got carried away. I just cant find a bit I want to delete. x_x

Sam Brady*

*blue As far as the future part goes, that's all fine with me.  But alpacas, and lots of other non-human animals, have ``a childlike wonder of things and a need to satisfy their curiosity''.  So that can't be a necessary part of being human.  Unless you think alpacas are human.  Maybe being human involves having that quality AND being descended from us.  But that seems a bit unfair.

Jason*

jeeze, what in god's name is your fixation with alpacas all about?  It's really wierd and spooky (yukk).  makes me wonder if i want to share a classroom with you.

*black Someone isn't too bright! Smart move - abuse the lecturer. What is yor fixation with being abusive? Makes me wonder if I want to be in a lecture theatre with YOU!
I look forward to seeing this VANDALISM deleted!*

*blue It's OK.  It isn't a student.  Just a troll.  Jason*

*red If we became emotionless and blindly analyitical, and alpacas evolved into social beings with a childlike wonder of things and a need to satisfy their curiousity (highly likely on all counts), then stuff humanity. I'd be rooting for the alpacas. So long as whoever the space-exploring race, was, i could relate to them to a greater extent than not. :) Humans are nothing without humanity. Then again, I dont have any plans for having kids in the near future. Having that be a part of my world view might change the psychology of it. 

sb*

*green do all people have a child-like wonder of things and a need to satisfy curiosity? It might be the very vocal cynic in me, but there seems to be a lot of humans around who don't appear to have these traits. Maybe we should stuff humanity and join the alpacas now? - save time
TeganLarter*

*red My thought is that the greater majority of astronomers and astrophysicists do. People with their head in the clouds don’t come close to people with their heads in the Magellanic Cloud. 
NASA for example get next to no funding and are sending folks off to asteroids and the big grey and red things soon. Most of the experimentation you hear about in space is similar in concept to a child putting circles in circle shaped holes and boxes in square shaped holes. Just on a dramatically more sophisticated level (or so we say for the same reason a child would say that their playtime is sophisticated experimentation). Having said all that, the space race was basically Russia and the US, pulling down their pants and comparing. So science isn’t all that exploration is in the name of at times.

In any case I'll stick to the humans until there are more "BRING BACK THE BIFF" than dreamers in my life. 

sb*


*black  Actually, from an anthropological perspective, the only difference between humans and animals is the formation of religious society- every ancestral group of people was initially bound together through a religion of some kind which resulted in the creation of civilization- animals have language, use tools, form social groups, and most definitely have curiosity as well as most other emotions and motivations as we do... many other forms of life could have emerged as we did, we just got lucky by circumstance...(a smaller scale version of anthropic principle for ya there).. 

as far as how much of your natural body is reducable to technology i think that once you rely completely on technology provided sense experience (brain in a jar style)you are no longer human, people need use of rational as well as empirical data of some sort (even Heller Keller could still feel and smell).
       
---chris pawlisko*

*red edit. That last post of mine was a little long winded so i got rid of it
-SamB*

*blue I liked it.  Mind if I put it back?

Jason*