Sort of thing Jason was talking about:

`` It has been claimed (see Oyama's hypothesis, about the active nature of the Martian soil) that the presence of hydrogen peroxide on the surface of Mars would explain some of the the results of the Viking biological experiments in terms of purely inorganic chemical reactions. However, although hydrogen peroxide is known to form constantly on the surface of the moon Europa as a result of the bombardment of charged particles moving in Jupiter's powerful magnetic field, it does not appear to exist on Mars in anything like the concentration needed to account for the Viking data abiologically.

According to a very different scenario, put forward by Dirk ..Schulze-Makuch at Washington State University, microbes may exist near the surface of Mars that use a mixture of hydrogen peroxide and water in their cells. Purely water-based life may have originated on Mars when the planet was much wetter than it is today but as the planet cooled and dried out, the martian organisms may have adapted to their new conditions by taking in hydrogen peroxide. This would have lowered the freezing point of their intracellular solvent, enable the creatures to continue metabolizing at much lower temperatures, and would also have allowed them to harvest the small amounts of water vapor in the atmosphere, since hydrogen peroxide has a strong affinity for water. In a paper to be published in the International Journal of Astrobiology ..Schulze-Makuch points to an energy-capturing process similar to photosynthesis that produces hydrogen peroxide as a by-product instead of water.

The presence of microbes on Mars containing hydrogen peroxide would neatly explain the Viking biology results. For example, the oxygen and carbon dioxide that was observed in the Viking labeled release experiment would be the products of water in the LR experiment causing ..H2O2-rich cells to pop and, at the same time, oxidize the cells' organic material.''


http://www.daviddarling.info/encyclopedia/H/hydrogenperoxide.html#H2O2, viewed 2 June 2008

*red Its a god aweful small affair... to the girl with the mousey hair...*

Phoenix Mission

Here is a general article about the landing and (apparent) purpose of the current Phoenix mission, if anybody wanted to learn more about it.

http://www.economist.com/science/displaystory.cfm?story_id=11448741

 It mentions the probe is able to detect traces of organic molecules ("tantalising"), but would not be able to detect micro-organisms themselves. It's going to run a search in the Martian permafrost, in line with the ability of some terrestrial organisms to survive in our permafrost.
 The article mentions a Harvard study recently published in Science: here's a link to it 

http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/reprint/320/5880/1204.pdf. 

It's a bit technical, but basically leaves room for the presence (some time) of water on Mars, made inactive (for want of a better description) by dissolved chemicals. The level of this inactivity on Mars seems to be at an intolerable level for any known terrestrial organisms... Potential conclusion for the existence of life on Mars?
 Not absolutely. But this sort of thing, an earnest effort, demonstrates to me how we are at this moment in time (and perhaps indefinitely) limited to what we know of terrestrial biology as we search for evidence of extraterrestrial biology. That's not a bad thing, just the scientifically rigorous thing to do with our current knowledge.... Unless we see life directly, we can only explore the conditions on planets like Mars that might give rise to life. And unfortunately, we might only be able to explore the possibility of Earth-like life, when we look only for conditions.
 Don't want to say there is isn't room for possible development so that we can, eventually, stop probing for signs of extraterrestrial life on the basis of Earth life, but how?
 I think I'm just way out of touch with the methods of astrobiology, if they exist... help me understand if you like!

- Michael Marginson
