*blue A guy (sorry I'm terrible" with names) in our thursday tutorial bought up a question  that was...very roughly paraphrased..."If we found one case where, say I dropped a pen and it fell upwards, would that be enough to prove our theory of gravity wrong"

I thought that we couldn't just throw paradigms away even if they were found to be faulty, that we had to keep working with and on them (I've been reading Kuhn as you can probably tell). But I've since been enlightened to the point where I've heard there are other views held by other philosophers...
Does someone know what the other views are and to whom they are attributed?

Tegan*

*red I've cross-posted this from the _Poetry of the Universe_ discussion board to the _Philosophy of Science_ discussion board, because that course is very much about exactly this question.  The students there will now give you long and erudite answers.  For which they'll get marks.  :--)

Jason*

*blue Thankyou Jason :-)*


*blue Ok well, I'm impatient, and doing anything other than what I'm supposed to be doing, which is studying for physics test...
The answer I have to my question so far is as follows... Please add to it if you know something!

Alternate views are attributed to: Karl Popper, Imre Lakatos, and Thomas Kuhn

Wikipedia tells me that Lakatos tried to resolve an apparent conflict between Kuhn and Popper's ideas on the subject. 

Where exactly is this conflict? Popper doesn't seem to say that scientists should throw away paradigms when found faulty...I'm starting to get the idea that the original question is being unnecessarily complicated...seems to me that noone is actually saying that a theory should be completly dropped because of one (major in this case) anomaly. Yes? No? 

Oooh I'm getting lost! Tegan.Larter*

any Poetry of the universe students who are interested in these questions should just read the philosophy of science textbook appropriately named, "understanding philosophy of science" though you'll have a hard time finding a copy.

Popper says that as soon as you find something refuting a theory, it should be immediately abandoned. So, I think he does say that whatever leads to the observation that was found to contradict it, should be discarded.

I think the problem is shown by Duhem in the discarding/not discarding thing. He says that if a theory entails an observation with doesn't work, you don't necessarily just chuck out the theory, because the theory comes with loads of assumptions, any of which could be wrong. So you never really immediately know which part of the paradigm is wrong. It would be something really mundane or something fundamental.

Kuhn describes things in a very qualitive manner and doesn't really say anything precise. A quote: "A scientist who pauses to examine every anomaly he finds will seldom get useful work done" (not sure if quote is right) He says there is't a general answer to what anomalies should automatically make you want to revise the paradigm and which ones will get straightened out.

Hmm I can't think of anyone else off the top of my head. I'm afraid this hasn't been a very helpful answer :-)

-u4309050

*blue Thankyou u4309050, I will certainly be doing my best to get hold of that book.

Next thing I do will be to find exactly what Popper had said, if you're right, then wikipedia needs someone to change it [see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imre_Lakatos [06/05/08] Research programmes, first paragraph, second sentence, quote "Popper's theory as often reported (inaccurately) implied that scientists should give up a theory as soon as they encounter any falsifying evidence, immediately replacing it with increasingly 'bold and powerful' new hypotheses." unquote]

Duhem...Great! another name to look up, thanks! :)

I've heard that Kuhn quote somewhere else...Another one I'll have to find specifically. I was of the opinion Kuhn was speaking of scientists carrying out 'normal science' (not getting much useful work done if focusing on every anomaly). 
Doesn't it also depend of how you use the word 'useful'? Useful in what context? Useful to 'normal science' or useful in the wider scheme of things? 

If Popper did indeed say that the theory should be abandoned...does he propose a way for science to continue with no theory on that subject?

Tegan.Larter*

