See also Poetry-FurtherReading.

Jason


Just thought I'd mention a really good book which seems to cover alot of what we've been hearing about in lectures.

The Character of Physical Law, Richard Feynman, MIT press 1965,1967
ISBN-10: 0-262-56003-8

Seriously, if conceptual physics understanding is what you're after, there is noone better, IMO, than Feynman.

Tegan.Larter


More book stuff. Lee Smolin (a theoretical physicist), in his 2006 book _The Trouble with Physics_ [London: Allen Lane], recounts the history of attempts to unify physics, going way back, and argues that little  progress has been made in the last 30 years. He touches on most (all?) of the things that have already been talked about in class, plus a lot more - and there's even some philosophy.

Dick Parker

*blue If you don't mind novels, try Sophie's World which is good for philosophical history, and has on ok story, and The Solitaire Mystery, which is one of my favourite books, and, although I guess it is meant perhaps for children (I first read it 8) is still a beautiful book with some good little philosophical insights*

*red Time's Arrow and Archimedes' Point by Huw Price is very interesting and relevant. It is at the Co-op.*

*green I don't know who just recommended ``Time's Arrow and Archimedes' Point'', but it wasn't me.     However, I second the recommendation.  It's a difficult book, but well written and extremely relevant to the course.

Just in case you're one of the TWO people who's got copies of ``Time's Arrow'' belonging to me: could I please have them back?  (I can't remember who you are, or I'd email you.)

Jason*

*purple I found "The Complete Idiot's Guide to Theories of the Universe" by Gary F. Moring is a good non-technical reference throughout the course...

Christian Maskey*


*I'd recommend "Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy" by Kip S. Thorne. It's a curious mix of high-level pop-science and historical and personal reflection on the key players and why they backed the horses they did; as written by an insider who obviously loves his job. It's a bit old now (1994) but still worth a read (for the diagrams and typesetting, if nothing else).

Carl Brusse*