If anyone feels like discussing anything about the course, you can use this page, anonymously or nonymously.  If you post something clever, and give your name, you will get tutorial marks.

You can and should make sub-pages of this page. To do that, type in the word "Poetry" followed by a dot followed by whatever you want the sub-page to be called — eg., Poetry.the.world.is.made.of.beer. When you save your edit, the phrase will automatically be turned into a link to the new sub-page.
----

PoetryofScience.Quantum.Suicide

misanthropic.principle

PoetryofScience.Robots

Poetry.Atom.Smasher

Poetry.Results?

Poetry.Moon.Illusion

Poetry.Proof.of.Panspermia??????

Poetry.Au.Naturale.in.The.Vacuum

Poetry.is.it.cold.outside

Poetry.my.house.is.made.of.beer

Poetry.Einstein.And.Bohr.And.God

Poetry.Protecting.Europa

Poetry.Interesting.Science

Poetry.Extreme.Life

Poetry.Panspermia

Poetry.Alternative.Life.on.Mars

Poetry.Unexplored.Earth

Poetry.Rocky.Planets.versus.Gas.Giants

SexAndDeath.Beginning.of.Life (cross-posted by Jason)

Poetry.Non.Earth.like.life

Poetry.I.want.to.believe

Poetry.Essay.Topic.5

Poetry.Baryonic.Matter

Poetry.Dinosaurs.in.SPACE

Poetry.Is.the.reasoning.used.in.certain.multiverse.models.bad.maths?

Poetry.Overcoming.Bias

Poetry.Irrelevant.Topic.of.Relevant.Novels

Poetry.Where.is.the.assignment?

Poetry.Science.Off-topic.Type.Question

Poetry.Essay.Results

Poetry.time.reversed.processes

Poetry.Gravitational.entropy

Poetry.Lecture.notes

Poetry.Faster.Than.Light.Communication

Poetry.Stuff.Worth.Reading

Poetry.Numbers.and.Computability

Poetry.brick.availability.

Poetry.spacecraft.anomalies

Poetry.whats.a.dimension.anyway?

Poetry.Questions.about.reading

Poetry.I.Have.A.Theory!

Poetry.Expanding.Universe

PhilosophyOfScienceEPRAndThe10thDimension (cross-posted by Jason)

Poetry.CourseName

Poetry.Deterministic.Relativity??

Poetry.Backwards.Causality

Poetry.Hawking.Vs.Price

Poetry.Pink.black.holes!

Poetry.Biological.V.Technological-progeny

Poetry.Access