Working title: *making the precautionary principle coherent by making it concrete*

The Precautionary Principle is a good thing.  It is apparently true, and it informs important policy decisions.

However, here is the bad news.  If stated too abstractly, the Precautionary Principle appears to contradict:

 (a) another important decision-making tool, namely Decision Theory, and
 
 (b) itself.
 
The solution, we will argue, is to make the Precautionary Principle less abstract.  Concrete versions of the Precautionary Principle can be either true or false.  Recent history suggests that some of them are true and very important.

"Weckert and Moor are right that their approach can lead to a resolution of at least some paradoxes that are thrown up by the application of the PP." -- Steve

The asymmetry between positive and negative actions, in my opinion, needn't come from Pogge's theory of positive and negative duties but could come from a consequentialist consideration of specific cases.  In the particular case I'm likely to be working on next year (on another grant), namely importing a bad organism, causes extreme harm, but refraining from importing a good organism causes relatively minor harm ... not for any interesting theoretical reasons; it just does.  (As an epicycle on that: one could look for more evidence about possibilities which contradict my assertion.  There must always be such possibilities, maybe with very low probabilities attached.  But as a matter of bounded rationality, one shouldn't generally look for them when time is limited.  This argument needs more said about it.)  

And such cases are typical of cases in which people often want to apply the PP (I think).  If I'm right then the PP may not be true IN GENERAL but there are many interesting cases in which versions of it are true.

ElaineOran says: ``Sometime I think things are done [i.e. the PP is applied] when people know they are wrong ... because it will lead to resources to do more work. Is this ethical? I think it's fine. But there is the issue of starting a controversy so there is funding''