This posting follows the discussion in the tutorial on 29 Mar 07.  I am putting it up here because I want to discuss it more, but not in class – I am worried that questioning the scientific method itself is off-topic, or at best peripheral for the philosophy of biology. (What does everyone else think of this?  Is there anything we should just accept - the laws of physics, perhaps - so we can ask more meaningful questions about the biology itself?)

In this posting, I will argue that science is value-free, by definition.  I will agree straight away that the decision of what science to pursue, which hypothesis to test, is decided at least in part by personal values.  And this is an interesting aspect of the sociology surrounding science.  But the decision of which hypothesis to test has no affect on the outcome of testing that hypothesis.  The decision lies outside the scope of the scientific method.

Werner von Braun is a good example of scientific work being resistant to the values of the scientist doing the work.  Von Braun was a Nazi rocket scientist during WWII, helping build the V2 rockets that bombed London.  *blue http://www.guntheranderson.com/v/data/wernherv.htm [Jason] * Despite this, he later worked in NASA, and was instrumental in the success of the Apollo missions.  (FYI – he was asked during a NASA press conference if he was sure that the Apollo rockets wouldn’t fall on London.  I believe he then left the press conference without another word).  

It is possible for experimental results to be distorted by observational bias.  This bias may be caused by strongly held values.  Science self-corrects for this by performing replicates of experiments (always) within a study, and if the results are interesting, by repeating the whole study (usually by a group that is interested in disproving the results).  

There are some instances where it may be impossible to repeat an experiment – rare events in astronomy (certain kinds of supernova), ecologies that are destroyed by the researchers examining them and lack of funding are examples.  But even here, if they could repeat it, they would, and are careful to draw limited conclusion when they can’t.

Instances where there has been a failure to apply the scientific method properly does not refute the validity of the method, but rather the researcher’s ability (or opportunity) to practice science.  To say otherwise would be like claiming that because no one has every managed to apply Mill’s utilitarianism perfectly (maybe they have – I am just using this as a random example to show that lack of positive instance of a theory does not necessarily disprove the theory) , then utilitarianism doesn’t work.

This is not to say there aren’t some philosophical problems with science – the assumption of universal uniformity of natural laws, and the reliance on proof by induction would be two of them.  But I don’t believe that contamination of experiments by the scientist’s personal values is one of them.  

I want to make a stronger claim than that science is value-free in the ideal – I am claiming that science is value-free in the vast majority of its practice.

Comments/criticisms anyone?

Morgan Sheridan

----

   I will concede the point that science is often practiced carefully, so that values don't interfere too much (non-bias being a value of many of our scientists). There are systems in place, such as peer reviewing and repeating of experiments, that guarantee that in most cases scientists can't let their values interfere in too obvious a way. However, i think that saying 'science is value free by definition' is going too far. By definition, science is always practiced by people, and people are always susceptible to blind spots caused by prejudice and pre-existing values. 
   This wouldn't affect science too much in the observational stage, but isn't interpretation of results and forming of conclusions ( as well as chioce of experiment, hypothesis and method) also pretty much an intrinsic part of science?
   This part, I think, would always be affected by the values of the scientist. In our society, the varying values of groups with varying values fortunately seem to balance each other out and test each other (at least from an INSIDER'S point of view). However, in a society where almost everyone shared the same values, couldn't all the science of that society become skewed?   
   Just some thoughts, anyway, for the sake of playing devil's advocate :-)

Jessica Nelson

----

The observations/experiment are but a small part of science. Isolating these things, then calling that science and saying that therefore science is value free is an empty point, because that is using a very limited view of what the science is.

When looking at this problem, we do have to consider the choice of experiment and at the end how the data is interpreted. I would argue that it is impossible to interpret anything without personal bias.

The effect of personal bias can be limited by repeated experiments by several independent bodies, but this rarely happens. You can't get a research grant to repeat a project. You can't publish the "verification" of results, the referees will tell you this experiment has already been done. You can only publish when you have findings contrary to the paper you were testing. So there is no incentive for a scientist to repeat an experiment, so it very rarely gets done. 

There are some very good examples of this in "Surely you're joking, Mr Feynman". I can't remember all the details, and some of them may be wrong, but the gist of it is right, but one of the examples revolves around a physical constant that was vital to the work Feynman was doing at the time and he basically found it was wrong. He tried to trace the history of the constant and eventually found the original paper, saw the error, but so many papers had been written just assuming the correctness of this constant. 

Another revolves around a psycholoy student he met at a party (or the like) and he was discussing scientific method with her and he was talking about how experiments should be repeated and the like, and reportedly she was talking to her supervisor about this, and the supervisor remarked "there's no need to repeat the experiment, it's already been done, we know the result."

So to be descriptive of the scientific world, scientific method is almost never followed. And pragmatically, I don't see how it ever can. We only have so many resources, and the people funding us are idiots.

Stuart Mitchell

----

Jessica and Stuart:  Excellent postings guys.  I see my position was not as convincing as I thought it was…I am almost ready to admit that I am wrong.  But not quite:

Stuart, in his excellent posting, points out that I am using a very narrow definition of science.  This is correct – I AM using a narrow definition.  I intended to, because I think very few human activities actually qualify as scientific research.  To have a broad or ambiguous definition of science risks admitting voodoo science into the field (research that pretends to be scientific, but falls short of the required experimental rigour – there is an excellent book called “Voodoo science” by Robert Park if anyone is interested)

Let me be more formal with my definition of science:  

Science is the acquisition of knowledge through the scientific method.  

The scientific method is the testing of hypotheses in objective and repeatable tests that use both negative and positive controls. 

Stuart and Jessica then bring up two main points:

- You have to choose what hypothesis you are going to test, and this will depend on hypotheses you value.

Yes, this it true.  But this will only influence what kind of knowledge you acquire – not the accuracy of the experimental results.  You might say that at the ANU, we value biology more than chemistry (certainly true if you measure value as proportional to funding).  Fine, but the chemistry we do is no worse because we value it less, we just discover things – perfectly accurate things - at a slower rate.

- Observational error:  you might not have seen what you thought you saw.  Worse, you might have seen things correctly, but it was just a freak event, and truly representative of what you were studying at all.

True, but I still think replication of experiments solves this.  And I don’t think this needs to be done by repetition of whole studies by several independent bodies.  Replicates of an experiment within a study, followed by peer reviewing before publication, would seem to be enough.  I also think replication of experiments/whole studies occurs more often than you think, Stuart.  Most major developments in science have been replicated by several groups.  Robert Park, in “Voodoo Science” points out that the discovery of cold-fusion and the benefits of homeopathy are two fields which some people periodically try and prove with science.  They are uniformly rejected because they can never offer experiments that can be replicated.

Ok, so what I have been arguing for is in fact an idealised concept of science, and I wholeheartedly agree that researchers sometimes fall short of realising this ideal.  

But most of the time, I would argue that researchers DO meet this ideal.  They successfully avoid observational error and interpretational bias and develop a model that describes the world exactly as it is. 

How else can we explain the dramatic success of science?  *blue [Serendipity. Stuart.]* *green  (That is an awful lot of serendipity. Morgan)* From the synthetic fibres/GM natural cotton clothes we wear, to the Pasteurised food we eat, the antibiotics and other medicine we take, cars we drive and the telecommunications by which we communicate with each other, science has permeated almost every aspect of our lives.  The individual values of particular scientists are often conflicting, or even directly opposed.  How can science be so successful unless it was largely immune to the personal values of its practitioners?

Cheers,
Morgan Sheridan

----

I was talking to a friend about the lack of pure science being done these days and he reminded me of the research being done into gravitational waves and I was reminded that this was a topic that I actually new a little bit about from one of those ridiculous high school assignments where they get you to do research on a topic that you'll never have any hope of really understanding properly at such an age. Anyway, I digress...

Morgan, add this one to your arsenal:

They're looking for gravitational waves almost purely because it's a prediction of general relativity. The technologies involved are not new. One technique involves using giant interferometers, another basically involves what is just a big cylinder of aluminium. The technology is, however, very expensive and projects get lots and lots of funding. 

To wrap it up neatly, the search for gravitational waves is something that's basically only of theoretical interest (presently) and involves expensive technology that is by no means new.

Don't get me wrong, there are lots of examples, but unfortunately proof by three good examples is not a valid method of proof.

I agree that science has been very successful. All we have to do is look at the techonology we developed in the last 50 years, but I still believe it has grave problems.

Look at quantum mechanics, arguably a rather successful theory. Yet it is inconsistent with another major theory of physics, general relativity (the motivation for things like string theory). A lot of precise experimentation and good theoretical work has gone into both, some very good science, using your definition, Morgan, but we have this awful inconsistency that noone really knows how to get around.

Forgive the use of physics. I know this is strictly a philosophy of biology course, but I'm afraid that I don't know any examples from biology that are anywhere near as striking as this one from physics.

Stuart

----

Morgan's definition of science in the ideal is fine by me. Because by labelling it 'in the ideal', it makes explicit the fact that it has not and could not ever be actual. 

The further point I'd like to throw out there, and not defend right now because I'm meant to be writing an essay (actually on pretty much this point): that even this conception of science in the ideal is a cultural phenomenon, it arose out of particular concerns at a particular time in a particular place, and the same is still the case now, even if those particularities are now less particular in the other sense. Which may or may not be good and or bad, I have no idea. But I will commit to the further claim that even this conception of science in the ideal, a conception that holds itself to be universally true, even as holding itself to be universally true, has changed.

Of course a conception of an ideal can be informative and useful and so on. In fact I think that is in fact the case with science. But one should be able to show how it is useful, and to do this you are already trying to ground a description of science in actual forms of life. Now I don't know if we want to make the forms of life more 'real' than the science, this is something lots of critiques of modern science qua ideology would say, and I don't know about that, mainly because I don't know what it's supposed to mean. But equally we don't want to commit, at least too hastily, to saying that the entities of science are more real just because they're adjudicated by such and such an authoritative idealisation, because in doing so we are, or should be, admitting that it is precisely an idealisation, one which we trust to reflect something 'real' ONLY in so far as appeal to it in various (particular) times and places has given good predictions, told a cohesive and coherent story about something novel, or whatever.

I think, and I think this is something Jason would agree with, that there's really no point in doing philosophy of science in abstraction from either study of contemporary scientific practice and social contexts, or historical practice and contexts, or both. Otherwise you end up dealing with concepts and idealisations, which are great for talking about concepts and idealisations, and not much else. Which again is not to say that concepts and idealisations are bad, just that they can't provide the 'else', which would be the world we actually live in.

and no i don't know what that means.

- Tom