I listened to the following program on ABC Radio National recently: THE SOCIAL INTELLIGENCE HYPOTHESIS (Science Show: 17/02/2007)http://www.abc.net.au/rn/scienceshow/stories/2007/1846476.htm

It had the following precis: "Why do humans have such large brains? How did they get to be so large? The human brain had two large growth spurts. About 2 million years ago it increased by 50%, then a few hundred thousand years ago it increased again. This week on The Science Show, Wendy Barnaby traces the history of the human brain and looks at the social intelligence hypothesis which suggests being able to get along with each other, understand each other and each other's thoughts led to one of the big increases in the size of the human brain."

The main thesis of the program seemed to be that  about 2 million years ago brain size increased because people were living in larger more complex groups, and were having to keep track of different people and a larger number of social relationships. Apparently there was another growth spurt about 200,000 years ago, when language developed.

What bothers me is the idea that brain size increased to allow these developments. It seems as though the argument is that some of our ancestors sat round the camp fire, perhaps as a committee, and decided that their offspring would need larger brains to cope with social developments, so they obliged in some way. I would have thought that these developments followed the increase in brain size, if, indeed, an increase in brain size was needed for them to take place.

What is it with brain size, anyway? Birds have relatively tiny brains, but some species are capable of feats of navigation that humans require a suite of electronic equipment to perform. *pink This is a REALLY REALLY REALLY good point ... and navigation is the least of it.  Birds, especially if you pick the most intelligent birds as your examples, such as large parrots and corvids (crows, magpies, currawongs etc.), are much more intelligent than almost any mammals in almost every way, even though their brains are tiny.  I can tell stories in class about this if you remind me.  Somehow, birds' brains are much more efficient than ours.*

*pink But still there is something important about brain size.  I guess changes in brain efficiency are very rare, since they must require really major mutations.  In that case, evolutionary changes will often pit species with similar brain efficiencies but different brain sizes against each other.  Jason*

As I said, I really know very little about this subject, but, secure in my ignorance, I feel uncomfortable with what I perceive to be the teleological implications of the social intelligence hypothesis.

Get out the slings and arrows folks. Attack me. Tell me why I'm wrong. I'm seeking enlightenment.

*green But you're not wrong!  Jason*

Dick Parker

PS. Jason,
I am aware of the link to the Stanford article on teleological notions in biology, and I have had a quick look at it since I wrote the above entry. Now I have a bit of work to do.

PPS. I see that your web site has been attacked.

*green Thanks.  I've fixed it. It'll get attacked again.  No big.*

----
 This is always a tricky question. It's a bit like the one with the bat's sonar and their large ears. If the sonar came first, it would have been useless without the finely tuned hearing, but if the hearing came first, what caused it to develop?

From what I understand (which isn't neccessarily a lot, I admit), maybe the larger groups came together for reasons that had little to do with brain size- for better protection from predators, for example. Then perhaps those with slightly larger brains- or rather brains with a slightly different structure, had the advantage in dealing with the situation, and a better chance of mating. With regard to the language part of the question, maybe again our brain size and the complexity of our language grew side by side, beginning with very simple signs, once our throats had changed to allow speech. Which leaves us with the question of why our throats changed in the first place- I have no idea, so if anyone does know, please fill us in.

Lastly, with regard to brain size and language, from what I remember from an essay done long, long ago, there is a theory that there is a particular part of the brain devoted to complex language, and that our possession of this is the reason that we are able to form complex sentances, etc, while chimps can understand and use only simpler signs; 'bannana', but not 'please give me a bannana'. So perhaps comprehension of language has more to do with brain mechanisms than brain size.

-Jess Nelson

-----

It's certainly true that brain 'mechanisms' have functional evolutionary priority over sheer brain size. One stark illustration is that homo neanderthalensis (Neanderthals, european species of advanced hominid ) had a signficantly larger brain, judging from skull capacities, than we do, but were nowhere near as psychologically complex, shown basically by the fact that they were wiped out by our ancestors when they walked into europe around 35-30kya. *green I don't see why psychological complexity should always win.  Please explain (maybe in class). Jason* Another way of thinking about it is that more complex mechanisms tend to require more meat. *green Ahem ... or vegetables.  Jason* But it's no strict law: my understanding is that even homo sapiens brains have actually shrunk over the evolutionary recent past. Brains are expensive to run, so getting better efficiency with less meat is going to be favourable.

The chicken-egg problems of how such complex and deeply situational traits got to be there at all are at the heart of the big questions in bioanth about human evolution, as I assume it is in all evolution science. It's also what creationists latch onto in order to claim irreducible complexity. But you can, with enough evidence, really create plausible sounding theories to (try to) explain these things. It's all about narrating a chain of happy unions of potentials and pressures, selection for one trait involving a side effect that is then selected for with respect to some other trait or niche. Society makes it more complicated as well, because social interactions are not clearly either traits or niches but kind of both. 

There is a DVD at the (now somewhat wrecked, it seems!) library about human evolution, but it's pretty rubbish., people in apesuits, totally overdramatic and far too slow. If anyone is interested I could have a go at explaining some of the {pre-XX, should say:} non-social pressures and potentials in early hominids. I wont just start recanting because, well, it's a long story. but very interesting. though i'm sure there are enough guides-to on the net...

- Tom

---

You're right, complexity wont always win. I've been wondering recently whether a metaphysics of complexity could say anything about this, but I can't think of any basis for it being in any sense necessary. But so far as biology is concerned, in certain concrete forms complexity has and continues to win. *blue In hominins(#!), yes.  In general, I don't think so, but I guess you don't mean in general. Jason*

{Another nice analytic re-statement of what evolution just is about!}

I guess my specific point about the neanderthals should be qualified to something like this. Both neanderthals and homosapiens relied utterly on their unique behavioural complexities. not exclusively; neanderthals were much more suitably built to survive the -30degree European iceage winters. But even despite this relative disadvantage sapiens drove them out. notably, before the end of glaciation. Whether by violence or by competition for resources doesn't matter, they evidently possessed an adaptive complexity that allowed them to move their hairless and lithe bodies in a few thousand years out of the middle eastern deserts into the articwastes, pushing the chunky rivals into extinction. We can also point to the fact that only homosapiens had proper art, had much more sophisticated tool tech etcetc. No simple 'smartness', but surely complexity nonetheless, and one that surely was/ is some substantial ground of homosapiens' success. *blue Yes.*

re meat, I meant in that instance *red brainmeat*, hardware. *blue Ah!*

but your point is a good criticism anyway: we could've eaten more plants to get the extra energy needed, so I should have been more careful. though then we would need to explain why they started to eat more plants - larger brains? the chicken-egg situation again, or rather brain-foodenergy. 

as I understand it the way this particular theory deals with the problem is to say that the early hominiNs*red #* who started to eat meat, mostly scavenged, especially bone marrow accessed with stone tools, got with the same gut more energy out per energy used to digest, meaning that they were able to develop both shorter guts (less invested there) and larger brains (more invested there). why they started to eat meat is tricky too, but it seems implausible to say that they moved to meat in response to energy needs from bigger brains. apart from the fact that we'd then have to explain the brainexpansion somehowelse, it's also relevant that some chimps are similarly omnivorous and use many different tools,despite having comperably sized brains to these scavenging ancestors.

*blue Very interesting.  Thanks for this.  Jason*

though none of this accounts for the birds...

About the DVD series I mentioned, "Walking with Cavemen", I was probably far too harsh. *blue You can edit this page, you know!* It is pretty comprehensive in content and the production is fairly slick, so I should recommend it for anyone who is interested in this stuff. But the hyper-dramatic over-simplistic narration reeally irritated me. I mean, look what they called it!

*red #* apparently hominid is out. too much like "human-ish-but-not-quite" I suppose. politically correct evolution theory...

----

Re brain size in birds: It is probable that birds, flying as most do, were (and are) under substantial pressure to be streamlined, balanced and light i.e. to have small brains (among other things). As to how they achieve complex neural feats with relatively small brains, I suspect the answer has at least two parts. 

Firstly, ‘It’s not the size that counts’ a popular phrase that women would do well to remember, as it is the basis for the assertion that ‘men aren’t smarter than women’. Studies (just search google scholar) have indicated that connections between brain hemispheres and also neurons per unit-volume and synapses (in certain areas) tend to be more numerous in women than in men. These studies offer possible, partial explanation of how women manage to match men, in undertaking numerous complex neural feats, despite having smaller brains (generally speaking). If smaller, more densely connected brains can work as efficiently as larger, less densely connected brains; one can imagine that bird species would be under substantial pressure favouring any mutants who carried genes that added brain function without increasing size, or that maintained brain function but reduced necessary brain size. (…and being called ‘dense’ would be a good thing.)

Secondly, I have read that the brain anatomy of birds is fundamentally different than that of mammals in many ways so, regardless of density, they may have evolved a more compact way of achieving some complex feats. Perhaps more likely is that birds have evolved the capacity to achieve some complex neural feats, however their range of such feats is limited to an extent that relates to their brain size.

I am wondering though, if birds are under such pressure to have small, light heads; where did pelicans come from? Check out the beak on those things! Talk about a character that would be ambivalent to selection; can being able to have ‘take-away’ be that beneficial?

In the scheme of things, mutations that increase brain-efficiency may not be that unlikely. If a brain is more efficient for its size when more highly interconnected, then a mutation that reduced the neuronal thinning (which occurs in developing brains) might be enough to affect an efficiency increase. The process of neural apoptosis (programmed cell death) could be controlled by easily disrupted, and relatively simple mechanisms.

Hamish.
