*purple Since other people are doing this...I thought I might too...So, heya! I’m Tegan, ex-dog groomer now ANU student enrolled in BSc but currently doing more philosophy than “science”…Being named after a character in the old series of Dr. Who, I guess I was kinda destined to be a bit different! I’ve got two Samoyed dogs, Sheba and Aries (Now famous as “Jason’s Schrodinger’s dog”) who I’d do anything for!
I came to ANU specifically for physics. Did my year 12 at the Canberra Institute of Technology, hoping to get into Veterinary Science at USYD, had awesome Maths and Physics teachers (both very philosophy inclined) and decided that Physics was more up my alley than Vet. Sci.

If I wasn’t at Uni I’d most want to be doing a mechanics apprenticeship…One day before the world runs out of oil, I want to own a genuine Group A VK Commodore, (I’ve wanted one since I was 5 years old!) but somehow figure I’ll have to settle for a genuine replica! Actually even if the world does run out of oil, I _still_ want one!

I was first inspired to try to go to uni after reading a book from the library called “Mendel’s Demon: Gene Justice and the Complexity of Life” By Mark Ridley (I think). My greatest thought achievement (IMO) to date has probably been the answer to why some of my SMS’s never reach their destination…Quite obviously because the CIA is stealing them to try to learn more about my plan to genetically engineer multiple 12 feet tall cats which produce strawberry flavoured milk…The plan is to collect the milk and send it up into space where it will freeze to form a strawberry ice-cream planet, which will be put in orbit around the Sun somewhere between Mars and Earth…This is my idea…if you wish to use it for whatever strange purposes…you know the deal. 

The best course that I have _completed_ at ANU to date would have to be PHIL1003 both logic options, semester 2 last year, taken by Christian Barry – If you like philosophy/science/law/winning arguments, this course is a must! My goal for this year (2008) is to make the biggest Tesla coil ANU physics department will allow.

u4407565 - not just a number...also a letter!:)*



