One of the slides at yesterday's lecture (12 October) said that "You must not lie except to save someone's life" is not universalizable & referenced Rachels pg 124.  I presume the relevant bit is the first paragraph, but I read that to say that while some formulations of rules are not universalizable in a Kantian sense, some are including the example Rachels gives: it is permissible to lie to save a life.
In a slide later in the lecture, ways of getting round the absolutism of deontology were given - the first I fail the memory test for, the second was making the rules more abstract.  Does not making the rules more specific as in Rachels eg also work?  Or does it depend on whether we place more weight on the fact that we can rationally will it to be a universl law (ie it's a categorical imperative) but it's got a condition (ie it is a hypothetical imperative)?

*blue Howdy, I think I differentiate a couple of questions here... (1) 'Do not lie' is an example of a categorical imperative which is often used.  The section you are refering to in the lecture and p124 of Rachels is looking to make a similar point.  The Case of the Inquiring Murder highlights a problem for the way we are taking Kant to reason --- i.e. Do not lie is put forward as a universal, unbreakable rule on the basis of the categorical imperative; in the case of the Inquiring Murderer we can formulate another categorical imperative "Do not lie except to save someones life".  This just highlights that Kant needs a story for precisely what we are to universalise (at least if he wants a consistent ethical system, which he does).  (2) The first option (which you felt you failed the memory test for) WAS to relax the absolutism/universality of the rules which the categorical imperative led us to adopt.  By relaxing the absolutism; many rules can be found.  The problem here is arguably too many rules.  How do we decide which ones to apply and when?  On what basis are these decisions made?
???I hope this helps... Post if not.  Cheers, Adam*

Helps me!  (But I'm not the original poster.)  Jason